---
layout: post
title: "w2: Children's Perspectives"
description: "children, ICT"
modified: 2013-05-31
tags: [student, ICT]
image:
  feature: abstract-3.jpg
  credit: dargadgetz
  creditlink: http://www.dargadgetz.com/ios-7-abstract-wallpaper-pack-for-iphone-5-and-ipod-touch-retina/
comments: true
share: true
---

# Week 2: HOW DOES ICT MAKE A DIFFERENCE
2.4 CHILDREN'S PERSPECTIVES

{:.no_toc}

* Will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents" header
{:toc}

# Student's voice
We rarely have the oppurtunity to listen to students when discussing about technology in the school system.

## UNESCO study

### Q: what students thought about how technology was being used in their schools

* The most common reaction: **enthusiasm**. 
* Technology is perceived as **fun**, even if related to traditional school subjects. 
* Important **motivational effect** of technology. 
* School is more **attractive**.
* Technology does **help them to learn** in traditional school subjects.
* Most commonly mentioned **tools**: Word processors, presentation software; also simulations and explanatory medias
* **Internet access** has transformed the way children search for information: Google, Bing, YouTube ..
* Technology allows children to be **producers and publishers** of their own creations.
* Many students like **digital story telling**. They use software for writing comics, create videos with characters made of clay and produce their own radio or video programs.
* **Portable devices**: tablets, cameras - this allows a natural use of portable technology to capture the world. 
* **Touch devices**: direct painting or drawing
* Many schools are using **LMS** - this has allowed students to leave a digitally supported relation with administrative tasks (assignment schedules, teacher feedback ...).
* Some are participating in **projects** that take their learning beyond the walls of their school. They use Twitter, webinars to communicate with others from all over the world.


### Q: the differences in the use of technology inside and outside the school

* **Technology in school is for learning**, but at home for chatting, playing games ... They rarely conceptualize what they freely do at home as learning. Social media = home only task (usually due to regulatory restrictions at school).
* For students who have access to technology at home, school ICT experiences are sometimes seen as **limited, restricted**.
* Many students live in a context where technology is a **natural dimension of their life**. Many of the things they enjoy are related to digital media, or communicated thorugh digital media.

# Students' perspective (UNESCO)

ICT in Primary Education 
Analytical survey 
Volume 2 
Policy, Practices, and Recommendations 
[Chapter 7](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/ictinprimary/unesco_book/Chapter_7_Students_perspective.pdf)
 
Extract from Kalaš, I., Laval, E., Laurillard, D., Lim, C.P., Meyer, F., Musgrave, S., Senteni, 
A., Tokareva, N., Turcsányi-Szabó, M. (2014). ICT in Primary Education: Volume 2 Policy, 
Practices, and Recommendations. Moscow, Russian Federation: UNESCO Institute for 
Information Technologies in Education. 

"The view on ICT in education is usually based on knowledge and experience from experts and school practitioners. In this section we wanted to describe the perception of one of the most important factors in the educational process: children. We asked students from our sample schools “how they perceived the use of ICT in their school” and “how they would describe the difference between the 
use of ICT inside and outside school”."

## 1. How they perceive the use of ICT in their shool

One of the most common reactions of students when asked about the use of ICT in school is **enthusiasm**. Technology is perceived as fun, even if related to traditional school subject - this has the important effect of making schools more attractive. (2)

### Enhancing traditional curricular subjects

Some uses of Technology have found a place as tools to support or enhance teaching and learning of traditional school subjects. Some students believe that with technology they are able to **learn more and understand complex concepts**.

Some students (even in some very innovative schools) associate ICT at school with **writing assignments and making presentations** to their classmates. The main tools are word processors (wirh included in word processing progmrans /spell checkers, dictionaries/) and presentation software. "Students recognize how much easier it is to present with today’s a presentation technology, but they also recognize the cognitive value of preparing the presentation itself."

For **searching informations** studetns assume that search engines are normal menas to search for information. Searching for information also includes video sources as an essencial source of information. "Simulations and explanatory videos are perceived as a contribution to learning 
concepts, especially in Science."

"Some teachers use **educational games** to teach and explore some specific contents (particularly in Maths). The “gamification” of these activities seems to provide high doses of enthusiasm end engagement." (3)

### Reading Advertisements Eddectively (example of a promising practice 13)
In pages 4-5 here is described how students learned to think critically about adveritsements. 

In this activity students searched for adveritsements about nutrition (it was their topic at that time). There are multitude of advertisements on YouTube to choose from, enabling the students to simply type the name of a food and a product company name to find the video of a commercial for that product. They choose 3. 

Then: "Each student was provided with a set of advertising strategies taken from the www.mediasmarts.ca website. Students were given the instructions to identify at least three strategies that were used in the ads. The strategies from the Media Literacy website were ideal kids or families, family fun, excitement, star power, scale, put-downs, facts and figures, repetition, sounds good, cartoon characters, heartstrings, bandwagon, weasel words, omission, and are you cool enough? (Descriptors of each strategy are given on the website.). Following each ad, they determined the purpose of the ad and through discussion identified qhich strategies were being employed to sell the product. 

"In the next phase, the students wrote their own ads for food product, employing at least three advertising strategies from the Media Literacy website list." 

They made videos and then projected them for the entire class. Students try to identify the advertising strategies used in their classmates' ads. They show how they uderstand or "read" ads.

 Their next spet is omission. They use research for the nutrituional value of the food procuct. (4-5)

> The idea I got from reading this chapter: technical day activity about critical reception of advertisements, safe use of the internet and so on ... - development of media literacy. 

### Innovative educational practices thorug technology

"Technology allows students not only to be consumers of multimedia material, but also to be producers and publishers of their own creations. Many students recognise these types of activities with high enthusiasm, even though they may not always recognise them as actual “school ctivities”. 

Many students like to tell stories using modern multimedia languages. They use special software for writing comics, creating videos with characters made of clay (stop motion) and producing their own radio or video programs. 

Technology also allows whole new experiences through digital music and drawing. Listening to and composing music has become more accessible for young students. 

The introduction of new portable devices (such as tablets and cameras) has allowed a natural use of portable technology to “capture” the world. The introduction of touch devices has also allowed direct painting or drawing with their own fingers."

Proramms mentioned:

* claymation
* Kodu
* StorybirdMovie Maker
* Voting Sytem
* The Little Mozart (7)

### Paperless School administration

"Many schools are using Learning Management Systems (LMS) to manage much of the communication flow within the organisation. This has allowed students to create a digitally supported relationship with administrative tasks (such as assignment schedules and teacher feedback)."

### Digital communication beyond the shool walls

"Some students have participated in **project** that take their learning beyond the boundaries of their school. They use twitter and webinars to communicate with people in different parts of the world (and even with the international space station). 

Today’s **communication skills** are hardly understood without digital interaction. Students have the possibility to learn such skills through actual interaction with other students and with adults located in remote places. 

**Social networks** have become a normal part of life for many students (even though formally there are some age restrictions for younger students)." (8)

## 2. Differences in the use of ICT inside and outside the school

Students believe that **technology in school is for learning**, but at home for doing things they like.

"Many students value **social interaction and friendship** as some of their main interests. Social media has became one of the most relevant activities that students associate as a “home only” task, either due to regulatory restrictions at schools or inadequacy of the school context."

"For those students who do have access to technology at home, school ICT experiences are sometimes seen as **restricted or limited** (due to time constraints and/or restrictions in software or Internet access)."

For many students technology is a natural dimenstion of their life. They enjoy usign digital media. "Even some students who have strong interests, which are not directly related to technology, seemed to find in technology a way to connect and enhance their personal interests." (9)

### World War II - Skype to New Zealand (example of a promsing practice 14)

Students talk to a world war II survivors, who as children lived in England, via Skype. Before the conference they collaboratively prepare questions. They were really excited. (12,13)

# Listen to the children
(optional)

*še nisem naredila*

*Task: Let’s listen to the children!*

*Let’s listen to the children!*

*Ask one primary school child or group of children (eg your students, your children)* 
*What do you think about how technology is being used in your school?* 
*How would you describe the difference in the use of ICT inside and outside school?*
*Record their comments on text (1 paragraph), picture (1 drawing made by a child) or video (less than 1 minute of video)*
*Upload your videos to a public repository of your choice.*
*Share your text, image or video link on the Padlet wall ‘Children’s Voices’ Padlet Wall: http://padlet.com/wall/wbarmwiy24*
Come back from time to time to see what other participants have contributed.*

From [Padlet](http://padlet.com/elaval/wbarmwiy24):

All children are excited of using technology.

Some comments I really like:

* "I don't like reading books. But reading e-books is interesting. Also I like to fulfill e-interactive games after that" (a child of 10 from Almaty, KZ)
*At home: "I use the Internet to search for things I do not understand and sometimes to play"
At school: "I use the page the Mister tells me"




