---
layout: post
title: "w2: Reflecting on the week"
description: "reflecting w2"
modified: 2013-05-31
tags: [ICT]
image:
  feature: abstract-3.jpg
  credit: dargadgetz
  creditlink: http://www.dargadgetz.com/ios-7-abstract-wallpaper-pack-for-iphone-5-and-ipod-touch-retina/
comments: true
share: true
---

Week 2: HOW DOES ICT MAKE A DIFFERENCE
2.5 REFLECTING ON THE WEEK

{:.no_toc}

* Will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents" header
{:toc}

"This week we had looked at different dimensions where schools have reported to experience changes due to the introduction of ICT:

* **Changes in the teacher profession:**  There has been more collaboration and sharing among teachers.  Teachers use technology to support their teaching and also for administrative tasks.
* **Changes in pedagogy:** New forms of pedagogy that are more attractive to children, supporting more project based and cross-curricular activities.  Children have more space to be creators of their own ideas ideas and initiatives, and not merely consumers of knowledge.
* **Changes in learners:** Mainly through an evident increase in motivation, which allows children to acquire - and practice - new skills. Some children who are labeled as “underachievers” in traditional curriculum subjects have found opportunities to excel, and many children have chance to learn acting as educators themselves.
* **Changes in administrative tasks:** Many teachers have seen reduced their routine administrative tasks with the use of ICT Systems at school, which allows them to keep a focus in teaching and learning."

# Interesting tips and ideas
* technical day (about learning media literacy)
* Skype in history classroom
* I think that in the classroom it's the best to use ICT for collaborative work (individual work can be done at home)
* if possible, there should always be more options for children to chose from how the task could be done - it's up to children to decide how they plan to do it and which tool would they use

I was thinking, that if in the future the teacher will not have time for learning design, i will have to look for another job, because lesson planning is very creative work which I really enjoy. I couldn't just take and use some other teacher's lesson plan without even making the smallest change/improvement.
