---
layout: post
title: "W5.3: How to overcome challenges and obstacles"
description: "technology opprotunities, assignement"
modified: 2014-06-25
tags: [ICT, issues]
image:
  feature: evelyn flint rose.jpg
  credit: Evelyn Flint/Texture Time
  creditlink: www.flickr.com/photos/texturetime/
comments: true
share: true
---

Week 5: HOW TO OVERCOME THE CHALLENGES OF ICT IN PRIMARY EDUCATION

5.3 HOW TO OVERCOME CHALLENGES AND OBSTACLES

Instructor: Florian Meyer and Natalia Tokareva

{:.no_toc}

* Will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents" header
{:toc}

# 5.3.1 Promising practices

Read promising practices number 5 (p. 53), 10 (p. 96), 11 (p. 104), 12 (p. 109) and 13 (p. 117) from [Kalaš, I., Laval, E., Laurillard, D., Lim, C.P., Meyer, F., Musgrave, S., Senteni, A., Tokareva, N., Turcsányi-Szabó, M. (2014). ICT in Primary Education: Volume 2 Policy, Practices, and Recommendations. Moscow, Russian Federation: UNESCO Institute for Information Technologies in Education.](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/ictinprimary/unesco_book/Book_ICTinPE_Vol2.pdf) 
These are promising practices shared by schools from different countries in the world showing how they managed to innovate even though they also faced some challenges and obstacles.

## Using iPads in the classroom

* For **instruction**: Prezi, QR-codes
* For **assessment**: an opportunity to assess quick and creatively: Nearpod to insert quizzes into presentation, Socrative to create quiz and get immediate results, Padlet: create a virtual bulletin border to see what students have learned; immediate deedback
* **differentiation**: ways they can show their learning (jurnal entry about what they have learned using Maxjournal, collaborate to create a drawing using Talkboard, collage with Frame Magic, song using GarageBand, write and illustrate a story using Story Buddy, explain and record their thinking on virtual whiteboard using Educreations)
* **resource database**: store digital books, upload notes or documents, write in Everonte, Tumblebooks, parctice math problems with IXL, digital flashcards, digital portfolio in Google Drive, dictionary, Explain Everything
(58-59)

## Hungary

Active collaboration beteen the two institutions - ELTE students, future teachers of Informatics develop specialised software environments supporting the special learning need of the school and 
its pupils. (99)

## A website for the appreciation of the childrens' digital literature

Main steps:

1. Defining the rules for the use of iPads in the classroom.
2. Oranizing student committees based on skills and interests of each: communications commitee, website committee, literary committee, drafting committee, advertising committee
3. Designint the list rubrics to analyze appreciation of the digital books. 
4. Creating a special website.
5. reading and appreciation of e-books. Completing rubrics.
6. Online publishing of the appreciations.

## Reading Advertisements Eddectively

1. They use ICT for adverisements to decode: about food.
2. They chose 3 and projected them for the entire class to watch
3. each student was provided witha a set of advertising strategies taken from the mediasmart website.
4. students were given the instructions to identify at least three strategies that wre used in the ads: ideal kids/families, family fun, excitement, star power, scale, put downs, facts and figures, repetition, sounds good, cartoon characteres, heartstrings, bandwagon, weasel words, omission, are you cool enough?
5. they deremined the purpose of the ad (to sell a product to a specific audience)
6. discussion: identify which strategies wre being employed to sell the product. How was the message delivered?
7. students wrote their own ads for food producsts, employing at least three strategies from the media literacy website. The production of their ad was a measure of their competency in understanding or "reading" ads. was their understanding deep enough to allow them to create an ad that employed advertising strategies that could sell their product?
8. made videos
9. projected videos
10. students have to identify the advertising strategies used in their classmates' ads
11. Understanding one of strategies: omission. The students use the internet to research the nutritional value of the food product.
12. Making advertisment with food value

# Video of children's recommendations

They would work more if they have technology

## Perceptions (forum)

### Profesional development

* constant development (changes are happening all the time)

### ICT in schools

James Callus: "From personal experience and keeping in mind the videos for this unit, it clearly transpires that in order to be successful in using ICT in our schools we definitely need a holistic approach focusing on action plans, professional development, technical and pedagogical support, learner support  and research about the impact of ICT within this framework.  Watching learnings voicing their  opinions was really enriching especially when considering that their responses can be easily grouped with the mentioned milestones."

### Advice to teachers new to ICT

Cary Hart: 
"I think that my advice to teachers who are new to integrating technology in your classroom, is to not be afraid of it.  If you are a new teacher, when you are planning ask your self what will I do if the technology fails during my lesson.  If you are an experienced teacher think about what "trick" you can pull our of your bag if the same thing happens.

You do not have to know how everything works in order to use it.  Turn that into part of the lesson.  Want to do animation for a project, then spend a few lessons "learning and exploring" about the animation software that you want to use.  Get the kids involved.  Turn it into a guided exploration with purpose and reflection.  You and the students will learn so much more than if you watch a video that shows you from start to finish how to animate.  Speaking of videos if you can find one to show you what is possible or just shows you how to get started or common trouble shooting those are great ways to supplement the "experimenting"

Make the students responsible for some of the learning, give them jobs.  For example, on group is in charge of finding out how to create a new animation.  One is in charge of finding out what makes the best backgrounds.  One is in charge of finding out how to export an animation.  Then at the end of the "exploration" phase they are in charge of showing what they have learned, or along the way of making when that knowledge is needed they present it.

This takes the focus off you and what you know.  It gives the students ownership of the application and what it can do and it teaches them that they don't have to be shown how something works first before they give it a go."

Yuniarti Santosa:
"Learning by doing, I think that is the key word.  The most important thing if the teacher is new to ICT is to plan how to use and integrate ICT in the lessons carefully. Once you prepare the lesson,  you need to prepare the students to take responsibility and be good digital citizens.  This will take some time until the students can work independently and demonstrates skills that you expect.  Start with something simple (For example: using games for maths/science, videos, storybird/story jumper to create story online, etc.).  Do small steps instead of making big step and students (and perhaps the teacher) get frustrated."

* take one step at a time
* peer mentoring and modelling of using ICT technology, share ICT skills, tips and how to further incorporate technology in the classroom
* explore the technology by yourself and experiment before you try using it with your students
* it is normal that something goes wrong
* ask students to help
* best and user friendly technology

### Sharing teaching and learning resources

* students make sources for use by younger children or other audiences

## Avenues to be taken to overcome challenges (video)

### Training

* it is very important
* at the beginning, offer technological courses and then keep a constanf professional development offer
* look for courses to follow to develop teacher's digital literacy
* offer teacher trainings in small groups to ensure mentoring and differentiation
* teach teachers to let children learn, explore and express themselves.
* organize staff workshops led by staff for staff: "when, where, what works"
* offer a program of continuing professional development for the entire staff, not only teachers

### Infrastructure

* build infrastructure and devices that are specifically designed fot ICT intefration
* the quality must be well thought and well supported in order to maintain a high level of quality that ensure all the actors are kept involved and motivated
* give ICT a real focus and value in the school.
* ICT in the school development plan.

### Parents

* they are important collaborators - they should be involved and well supported
* fill up the generation gap by training parents and children
* consider carefully the parental enagement because it is a big part of the success

### Culture

* ICT as a part of school culutre
* share with other schools
* make ICT specialist, pedgogical coordinators and teachers collaborate together
* creat a promotion team
* create a club of modern teachers

## Two main avenues

* **Shraning resources and experiences** - this can lead to a great professional development.
* **Instructional design** - **ICT should allways be at servise of the pedagogy** *v dispozicijo*, which means that when there is a strong pedagogical alignment within the design of a course, of an activity, or of a school year, it is easier to identify ways to overcome obstacles.

# Facing the challenges

## Major changes
*Read the book section on [‘Sharing’](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/ictinprimary/unesco_book/Chapter_6_Major_changes.pdf) to see the kinds of solutions and propositions teachers and schools would like to share on how to avoid pitfalls or obstacles, and also on how to give equal chances to everybody when teachers and schools want to integrate ICT. Highlight the ideas and topics that are currently most important for you regarding the challenges with which you have to deal.  [Pp. 100 to 105 from Kalaš, I., Laval, E., Laurillard, D., Lim, C.P., Meyer, F., Musgrave, S., Senteni, A., Tokareva, N., Turcsányi-Szabó, M. (2014). ICT in Primary Education: Volume 2 Policy, Practices, and Recommendations. Moscow, Russian Federation: UNESCO Institute for Information Technologies in Education.*](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/ictinprimary/unesco_book/Book_ICTinPE_Vol2.pdf)

"Major changes brought about by the integration of digital technologies have made significant changes in the school life, teaching methods and relations between all actors, including parents." (100)

"The survey showed that ICTs are transforming the way teachers work, interact, prepare, create things, and think." (100)

### 1. What really changed since ICT started to be integrated

Most teachers identify major changes in the following areas: 

* **The teaching profession, the teachers themselves** (teachers cooperate, communicate, share ideas and experiences, help each other in learning – in school, or at the regional, national or international level; continuing professional development and lifelong learning is now inevitable and students are observing teachers whether they develop themselves and esteem such effort; many teachers routinely exploit ICTs to find resources, prepare lessons, organise students’ work, evaluate results, and administer learning records; as noted repeatedly, not all staff attempts to integrate ICT, some staff resist change because they do not trust that technology will really work and will support learning).
* **The pedagogy, updated learning goals, new teaching and learning forms** (new technologies have introduced new opportunities to expand the variety of activities and forms and made them more efficient and attractive, projects-based, cross- curricular activities; ICTs strengthened the chances to participate in projects and  national or international cooperations and initiatives, on-line contests; ICTs have been the key element in transforming education from the traditional model to a more interactive, hands-on, student-led, product-oriented, exciting, learning experience; teachers also report that with the presence of ICTs, research and communication skills of their students exploded; new technologies give students unprecedented chance to create things and control things through programming, creating websites, building and controlling robots, etc., to express themselves creatively in many different ways). (100)
* **The learners** (students’ motivation to use ICT has triggered their skills, they are highly motivated by its use and want to do so to enhance their learning because they feel that they have moved away from routine methods; due to ICT, students can revisit their work, get instant feedback and refine it. They have wide range of tools at their disposal, which facilitates them to become more independent self- learners; through technologies the whole world came alive in the classroom; they got much better opportunities to become competent in new 21st century skills: collaboratively working in teams, solving more real world problems, communicating with anybody anywhere – these skills support their responsibility, self-confidence, and solidarity; the underachievers have better chances to learn and even to excel in some contexts, which gives them highly motivating joy of success. Due to different teaching and learning situations, the pressure of public wrong answers has diminished; in some sophisticated settings students become educators themselves, teaching, organizing and helping other students to learn; they observe their teachers learning continuously, which encourages their own lifelong learning skills and independent learning). (100-101)
* **Administration and paperwork** (some teachers state that their schools became paperless for communication and the administration has reduced considerably. We have to note, however, that some teachers stated exactly the opposit). (101)

#### Highlights

*  some staff just resist change, because they do not trust that technology will work. Nevertheless, ICT spreads through more classrooms and staff begin to support each other and share skills. Children throughout the school trust ICT, they are motivated and excited by its use and WANT to use it to aid their learning.
*  The fear of the teachers and parents of not knowing how to handle technology or how to control students with technology has diminished. 
*  Technology has changed a lot, especially access and connectivity. Otherwise there is little change. Technology follows pedagogy. But we have increased our expectations of what the quality of output can be from children. Their ability to revisit their work in a collaborative way, get instant feedback, and refine it is very different now. They have access to wide range of tools, not just access to knowledge but also people and cultures and resources, etc., and this facilitates children to be more independent self-learners, which encourages the lifelong learning skill of independent learning. They get engaged with what they are learning and take it home. They are in touch with the world. 
*  ICT expanded the grasp of development activities applied and made them more efficient. Besides, it brought information to a wider audience and enabled this audience to share it. The students got more engaged in the learning experience because they felt that they have moved away from routine methods. It was an exciting experience that acted as motivation towards understanding a lesson in a new modern way. (101)
*  ICT strengthened our chances in project participation. 
*  The basic concept, though, is that technology has been the key element in trans- forming education from the traditional model to a more interactive, hands-on, stu- dent-led, product-oriented, exciting, learning experience. Through technology, the world not only became smaller but it came alive in the classroom. Technology played a key role in the development of interdisciplinary projects, assuring with other subject teachers that students use technology as an application for all other subjects. When the internet and email accounts became available within our school, research and communication skills exploded, as well the borders between our country and the world suddenly disappeared! The entire school community could communicate now—teachers, parents and students—more efficiently. In a few years, our school became paperless for communication. 
*  students’ level of programming has grown exponentially
*  Desktop publishing and multimedia tools have transformed the look of student work and projects, as well as of teacher-prepared materials
*  But not all has been good: our students have lost their innocence at an earlier age and bullying has been magnified through social networking explosions.
*  Using internet at home is now more common. We are glad that pupils use internet for their learning and homework. Parents access a school website and electronic record books (for assessment). We give many internet based assignments. Pupils that have no internet access at home can attend computer clubs. 
*  The process of education is more effective and attractive – we use more visual, interactive and hands-on methods. DT has motivated our pupils and DT keeps them interested in their own learning. This includes also students with learning disorders. Teaching of foreign languages became also more effective – digital technology enables students to use foreign language in an authentic setting. 
*  The textbooks cease to be the only source of all knowledge. Our teachers teach pupils to utilize various sources of information, to compare and combine them. 
*   DT helps to transfer part of the responsibility to the pupil. (102)

### 2. Changing relations

"New technologies are – directly or indirectly – influencing all sorts of relations in the school (relations between students, teachers, students and teachers, between the leaders and the staff) and beyond it (new opportunities for communication between school and parents influenced their relations as well, namely raised their trust towards schools). Traditional role of a teacher as a reliable connoisseur is not defensible and is not expected by her students anymore: nowadays, students have unprecedented access to information, thus often ask questions, which teachers cannot answer (frequently sending their questions from home, by night, addressing their teachers, school leaders or anybody). Thus, teachers have excellent chances to know the students better: ... We know more about each other and we all try to understand each other. Teacher’s authority results from other qualities and her modified role of a knowledgeable advisor, a partner, a mediator who organizes the process, suggests guidelines, evaluates performance, helps students identify and solve problems and understand different concepts in broader contexts. 

Teachers became more relieved from administration, thus relations between them also changed, mostly towards extensive collaboration and sharing (as already noted earlier). They form small communities to solve particular problems, to learn together, to conduct projects, to promote new opportunities and priorities (such as inclusive education), to research, understand, and improve learning and achievements of their students and themselves." (105)

## Tessa project (video)

Giving teachers the tools to teach.

* online resources, materials
* connected teacher
* internationally
* resources are easily adaptable
* sharing resources and practices
* new knowledge