---
layout: post
title: "W5.1: Orientation to the week"
description: "uvod"
modified: 2014-06-23
tags: [ICT, implementation]
image:
  feature: evelyn flint rose.jpg
  credit: Evelyn Flint/Texture Time
  creditlink: www.flickr.com/photos/texturetime/
comments: true
share: true
---

Week 5: HOW TO OVERCOME THE CHALLENGES OF ICT IN PRIMARY EDUCATION

5.1 ORIENTATION TO THE WEEK

Instructor: Florian Meyer and Natalia Tokareva

{:.no_toc}

* Will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents" header
{:toc}

# Learning Outcomes:  

* To identify the different **dimensions of implementation issues**, and apply them to your own context
* To become aware of **problems** that can be encountered in using ICT. These problems and concerns can be related to different subjects.
* To **share and build some solutions** to these concerns and problems. These solutions can be of different kinds: learning design, infrastructure, negotiation with parents, communities of practice, policies, staff development, pedagogical innovations, differentiation, affordable access, and teaching support.

# 5.1.1 Introduction

Week 5: Inspiring examples and implementation concerns. How to overcome the callenges of ICT in primary education (video)

# 5.1.2 An inspiring project that overcame some challenges

## Description of innovation
Students as scientists. They connected with scientists.

## Challenges while implementing and developing project?

## Inspiring elements
* učenci sami izberejo žival (možnost izbire)
* izberejo fotografijo ki je free of copyrights
* tabela: source 1, source 2, spurce 3: information 1, information 2, information 3. Tako poskrbiš, da vedno poiščejo podatke v treh virih
* look for curiosities and surprising things
* compare and exchange information between teams and classrooms
* try raise new, significant and challenging questions about their species
* reflect currently about hte validity and soundness of their sources
