---
layout: post
title: "ICT in Primary Education: Transforming Children's Learning Across the Curriculum" 
description: "Description of the course."
modified: 2013-06-03
category: articles
tags: [ICT]
image:
  feature: abstract-3.jpg
  credit: dargadgetz
  creditlink: http://www.dargadgetz.com/ios-7-abstract-wallpaper-pack-for-iphone-5-and-ipod-touch-retina/
comments: true
share: true
---

Last week the course about ICT in primary education started, hosted by UNESCO and the University of London (Diana Laurillard). I'm thrilled to be part of it and learn from amazing people from all around the world.

So this is my course journal. I'm going to write down everythink I'll learn - and it's a lot!

Here are learning outcomes of the whole course listed:

1. The primary teaching community to be able to contribute to the **integration og a range of effective ICT-based practices and pedagogies**.
2. **School leaders** to be able to develop, improve and share the strategies and mechanisms that optimise the development of ICT-based teaching and learning in their school.
3. **Policy makers and schools related stakeholders, agencies and companies** to be able to support head teachers and specialist staff in developing pedagogy-led and problem-led uses of ICT. 
4. For all participiants a greater awareness of the **range of pedagogic innovation** that uses ICT, and the **many free technology tools** now available, to enahnce primary education.

Sounds wonderful, doesn't it?
I think this course is going to have a great impact on everyone involved and it will have great impact on better use of ICT in education.

[Source: ICT in Primary Education: Transforming Children's Learning across the curriculum](https://www.coursera.org/course/ictinprimary)
