---
layout: post
title: "w1: Supporting Teachers' Needs"
description: "teachers' needs"
modified: 2013-05-31
tags: [teacher, ICT, infrastructure, policy, drivers, enablers]
image:
  feature: abstract-3.jpg
  credit: dargadgetz
  creditlink: http://www.dargadgetz.com/ios-7-abstract-wallpaper-pack-for-iphone-5-and-ipod-touch-retina/
comments: true
share: true
---
# WEEK 1: THE 21ST CENTURY PRIMARY SHOOL
{:.no_toc}

* Will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents" header
{:toc}

# Survey about the lessons schools learned about the proces of integrating ICT

“In the schools survey we asked about the lessons they learned about the process of integrating ICT, and how they would do it differently now. The strongest responses were about how best to support the people who are responsible for the process: both leaders and teachers. There were similar responses from a recent survey in EU countries, which also echoed the Becta studies from some years earlier.”

## [The document ICT in Education Survey Summary from 2013:](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/ictinprimary/week1/1.4.1.%20ICT%20in%20Education%20Survey%20Summary.pdf)

### 1.  Infrastructure and recommendations

Infrastructure:

* 7 students per computer on average in the EU
* Interactive whiteboards: 100 students per interactive whiteboard, data projector, laptops, tablets, netbooks
* School heads and teachers consider that insufficient ICT equipment is the major obstacle to ICT use.
* Around 50 % of students at grades 8 and 11 in general education use a desktop or a laptop during lessons at least weekly, but around 20 % never or almost never.
* No overall relationship was found between high levels of infrastructure provision and student and teacher use, confidence and attitudes.
Recommendations:
* We still need policies and action at infrastructure level
* Focus on providing laptops/tablets/netbooks and interactive whiteboards – this would help to overcome the major obstacle to ICT use
* Infrastructure related policies should be accompanied by complementary measusres for the use of this infrastructure to happen
* EU level: supporting policies should take into account the very different levels and characteristics of infrastructure provision

### 2.  ICT based learning activities and confidence in digital competence

Survey findings:

* Most teachers have been familiar with ICT for teaching and learning but still use it first and foremost to prepare their teaching. Only a few use it (in a limited extent) to work with students during lessons. 
* Students take ICT-based activities several times a month/never/almost never.
* Digital resources: exercise software, online test, data-logging tools, simulations … are very rarely used.
* Teachers are confident in using ICT, positive about ICT’s impact on student’s learning
Recommendations for policy makers
* Increasing students’ ICT based activities during lessons and their digital competence strongly needs to be boosted.
* Policies and actions to support increase in teacher professional development.
* School heads should support the above policies and actions.


#1.4.2 Assessment of my priorities for teachers' and leaders' needs as they plan the integration of ICT

> **"Tablets are Good, Content is Better, and Teachers are the Best Educational ICT Investment."** 
([Wayan Vota](http://edutechdebate.org/tablet-computers-in-education/tablets-are-good-content-is-better-and-teachers-are-the-best-educational-ict-investment/))

* teacher’s own classroom
* support from the government and school head, from co-workers and parents
* IT infrastructure for teachers and students: hardware, educational software, VLE or LMS, 1:1  
* time to innovate
* computer rooms for children to learn independently on their own time
* collaboration between teachers in the school and between schools (collaborative environment for working together)
* pedagogic support (personal development)
* more time to innovate
* award (pay rise, more time for innovating …)
* smaller classes
* technical and pedagogical support always available

## Actions plans and policies for integrating ICT
"An UNESCO survey of primary schools that are integrating ICT included questions about how they approach that progress." This in in the *ICT in Primary Education, Volume 2* book.

### Selection of the approaches to integating ICT (from *ICT in Primary Education, Volume 1*, chapter 5), common to many countries

#### Questions

* visions or aims for e-learning
* who's involved in the development and delivery
* links to government initiatives
* the approach to technology in the curriculum
* digital tools and resources
* teacher development
* developing the digital infrastructure.

The focus is on the experiences of the leaders and teachers. "If we think about policy change from their point of view, it's useful to think in terms of the drivers that teachers and school leaders are most aware of."

#### The influences that prioritize their activities in the classroom or school (DRIVERS)
* carrer opportunities
* **curriculum requirement**
* **assessment requirements**
* **quality standards**
* **stakeholder demands**
* student needs
* **funding perspectives**
* strategic plans

(in bold: the ones who are probalby the most important for teacher who wish to integrate ICT)

(notice: !! all are external!)

These are the drivers that decide for or against the use of ICT.
Reasons against the use of ICT:
- test concepts and skills have nothing at all to do with those that children have learned in the context of ICT-based learning
- the quality inspection process usually does not allow for the early stages of innovation when things can go wrong, things fail > schools stop innovationg if there's to be the quality inspeciton.

"So, although all of these drivers are intended to work to improve teaching, many of them are not aligned with what it takes to innovate and integrate ICT."

#### Systemic picture of how innovation happens (ENABLERS)

What makes the use of ICT possible:
* searchable guides
* **ICT informations and guiding** (about the newest technologies and what can we do with them)
* **communities of practice** (because the technology is changing so fast; on training course you can learn the basic but not the lastest interesting sources and tools - for that we need a community, which enables the excange of ideas in practice with other teachers)
* ICT training and development
* evalutation of value and impact
* resource modelling
* **learning design support** (and lessons with positive impact of the newest technologies)
* R&D on pedagogies
* ICT systems and sevices
* rights and IPR advice.

"ICT training and development used to be thought very important, but as we saw in the EU Schoolnet survey, most teachers are now becoming much more confident in their digital skills anyway. It is teaching with ICT they need help with. And that means help with information and guidance about the latest new technology and what it can do, and support for new kinds of learning design and lesson plans that take advantage of those new technologies. And more important than training courses, are communities of professional practice. This is because the technology has changed so fast. A training course is good for basics, but not for the latest interesting tools and resources. For that you need a dynamic community to help you keep up, enabling you to exchange practice and ideas with other teachers. /.../ In all the innovative schools we surveyed, it was clear that the innovation was driven primarily bythe enthusiasm and committment of the teachers and leaders in those schools, despite the lack of funding."

enablers > teachers and leaders > drivers

The innovation is going on due to the enthusiasm and commitment and the digital skills of the teachers themselves.

##### How we should support innovative teachers
"The EU Schoolnet survey concludes that implementing a vision and strategies to support ICT use in teaching in learning requires **adapting teaching approaches**."

A UNESCO IITE survey concluded that in all schools wiht successful ICT integration the emphasis is on **collaboration between teachers**.

"So to summarize, for ICT to become effective, we must move away from teachers only doing their own lesson planning and design and towards teachers sharing and reusing each other's great ideas about how to use ICT." And teachers can't do that in their spare time (as they to now according to Schoolnet Survey)

#### How a national approach could plan a rolling program of change and innovation
So, we have enthusiastic and commited teachers who innovate in their lessons. But the problem is that the innovation is scattered and it doesn't necessarily migrate to other teachers and schools.
We need a systematic approach.

Phases od change and innovation (4-5 years):

1. "The ministry of education identifies the schools and teachers that are already the leading innovators and supports them in sharing their promising practices with other schools ready and willing to make the change. They're identified as leading adopters who also receive funding to commission help from the leading innovators. In this way they can exchange policies, approaches
and learning designs to spread the innovations wider." 
2. More schools are "able to act as innovation leaders and more schools ready to lead act as leading adopters."
3. "Nearly half the schools is generating innovations in ICT and nearly half adopting those ideas
from betting into their own practice. Those left will be the most challenging schools
which will probably need additional support from the government."
4. All schools are involved. "In this way, the knowledge, ideas, mechanisms and learning designs are shared across the whole system. It becomes a learning system which means it's now able as a system to adapt to the continually changing technologies because schools and teachers are working together to learn and share their discoveries of how to integrate ICT."

The same approach could be used for all kinds od innovations.

The final message: "Teachers cannot do this alongside normal teaching job. It's the role of the national government to make sure that every school has sufficient funding to give their teachers the time to innovate."

# 1.4.3 Supporting Teacher's needs

Learning Designer is a great page with learning design program. I plan to use it, if it's suitable for my needs as slovenian teacher (I think that there will be problems with letters). It would be great having something like this in Slovenia where slovenian teachers can create and share lesson ideas and designs.

## Ideas

Weekly diary - for developing literacy, handwriting skills, communication skills. It could take 5-10 minutes a week and they can share diaries if they want to.