---
layout: post
title: "w2.1: Orientation to the week: How does ICT make a difference; Dimensions of change within the school"
description: "Just about everything you'll need to style in the theme: headings, paragraphs, blockquotes, tables, code blocks, and more."
modified: 2013-05-31
tags: [change, teacher, student, ICT, school]
image:
  feature: abstract-3.jpg
  credit: dargadgetz
  creditlink: http://www.dargadgetz.com/ios-7-abstract-wallpaper-pack-for-iphone-5-and-ipod-touch-retina/
comments: true
share: true
---
# Week 2: HOW DOES ICT MAKE A DIFFERENCE
{:.no_toc}

* Will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents" header
{:toc}

# 2.1.1 Introduction to the main topics of the week

Our instructor for his week is **Ernesto Laval**.

##Learning Outcomes

* to identify different **dimensions of change at the school level** due to the integration of ICT;
* to be **aware of new opportunities for global participation** facilitated by technology;
* to understand the features involved in **effective porfessional development**;
* to be aware of **how children perceive the use of technology** in a school context.

## Sharing ideas and resources

* [Emerging technology Enhanced Learning](http://www.scoop.it/t/etel=)
* [Diigo](https://groups.diigo.com/group/ict-in-primary-education) 

## Dimensions of change within the school

Schools that sucessfully integrated ICT report that several changes have been observed, expected and unexpected. It seems that the adequate integration of ICT can have a transformative effect in different dimensions of the shool life.

### Changes in Teaching Profession

Teachers are transforming the way they work with each other: cooperation, communication, sharing ideas and experiences, helping each other in learning (inside school, national level, international level). 

ICT is used to: find resources, prepare lessons, organise students' work, evaluate results, manage learning records. 

Some teachers don't use technology because they don't trust that technology will really work and support learning. 

Technology continues profesional development and expects lifelong learning.

### Changes in Pedagogy

Schools update their learning goals and incorporated new teaching and learning forums. 

"With technology, teachers have seen new opportunities to expand activities into more project based, cross-curricular and attractive ways." There are more chances to participate in national and international projects and cooperation initiatives. 

"Some schools report that ICT have been a key element for transforming learning experiences into a more interactive, hands-on, student-led, product oriented and exting learning experiences. 

Teachers also report that with ICT, research and communication skills of their students had to be expanded. 

New technologies also give students an unprecedented chance to create and control things thorug programming, creating websites, buidling and controlling robots." 

There are new means and ways to express themselves creatively. 

### Changes in Learners

"Many students get motivated when they use ICT, and this motivation has triggered new skills. They feel that they have moved away from routine learning methods. With ICT, they can revisit their work, get instant feedback, and refine it." The wide range of tools help them to become more independet self learners. ICT also helps to develop and practice 21st century skills: collaborative work, which contains solving more real world problems, and they communicate with anybody anywhere. 

"Underachiever have better chances to learn and excel in some contexts", success increases their motivation. There are different teaching and learning situations and there's no more pressure of public wrong answers. 

"In some sophisticated settings, students become educators themselves." They teach, organinize and help others to learn. 

Seeing their teachers to learn encourages thir own life learning skills. 

### Changes in administration and paperwork

Somewhere the shools became paperless for communication.

In some shools the administration load has been reduced, but some teachers state the opposite.

# 2.2.2 Changes

## [UNESCO: *ICT in Primary Education. Volume 2: Policy, Practices and Recommendations.* Chapter 6: Major changes](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/ictinprimary/unesco_book/Chapter_6_Major_changes.pdf)
*Extract from Kalaš, I., Laval, E., Laurillard, D., Lim, C.P., Meyer, F., Musgrave, S., Senteni, 
A., Tokareva, N., Turcsányi-Szabó, M. (2014). ICT in Primary Education: Volume 2 Policy, 
Practices, and Recommendations. Moscow, Russian Federation: UNESCO Institute for 
Information Technologies in Education*

Integration of digital technologies have made "significant changes in school life, teaching methods and relations between all actors, including parents. /.../ The survey showed that ICTs are tranforming the way teachers work, interact, prepare, create things, and think." (2) 

### 1. What has really changed since ICT started to be integrated?

Most teachers identify major changes in the following areas:

* **The teaching profession, and the teachers themeselves**: 

  - cooperation, communications, sharing ideas, experiences, help each other in learning (school, regional, national, international level)
  - continuing professional development and lifelong learning is now inevitable + students are observing teachers
  - use ICTs to find resources, prepare lessons, organise student's work, evaluate results, administer learning records;
  - not all staff attempts to integrate ICT (they don't trust that technology will really work and will suport learning; UNESCO noticed that mistrust often remains longer with less experienced teachers who have lower level of digital literacy) (2)

* **The pedagogy, the updated learning goals, new teaching and learning forms**:

  - new opportunites to expand the variety of opportunites to expand the variety of activities and made them more efficient, attractive, project-based, cross-curricular activites;
  - better chances to participate in projects, national or international co-operations and initiatives and on-line contents
  - ICTs have been the key element in transforming education from the traditional model to a more interactive, hands-on, student-led, product-oriented, exciting, learning experience:
  - the research and communication skills of their students develop significantly
  - unprecedented chances to create things and control things thorug programming, creating websites, buidling and controlling robots ...
  - chances to express themselves creatively in many different way. (2)


* **The learners**:

  - their motivation to use ICT has triggered their skills
  - highly motivated
  - they feel they have moved away from routine methods
  - through ICT they can revisit their work, get instant feedback and refine it. (2)
  - they have wide range of tools at their disposal, encouraging them to become more independent self-learners
  - thorugh technologies the whole world came alive in the classoom
  - much better opportunities to become competent in 21st century skills: collaboratively working in teams, solving real world problems, communication with anybody anywhere - these skills support their resposibility, self-confidence, and solidarity
  - the underachievers have better chances to learn and even to excel in some contexts (the result is highly motivating joy of success)
  - due to different teaching and learning situations, the pressure of public wrong answers has diminished
  - in some sohisticated settings students become educators themselves: teach, organize, help other students to learn
  - they observe their teachers learning continuously - this encourages thier own lifelong learning skills and independent learning. (3)


* **Administration and paperwork**:

  - paperless for communication
  - the administration has reduced/increase (3)


* **Relations and roles between teachers, students and parents**:

#### Highligts  - positive
* Children throughout the school trust ICT, they are motivated and excited by its use and 
WANT to use it to aid their learning.
* The fear of the teachers and parents of not knowing how to handle technology or 
how to control students with technology has diminished. 
* Technology follows pedagogy. But we have increased our expectations of what the quality of output can be from children. They have access to wide range of tools; not just access to 
knowledge, but also people and cultures and resources, etc., and this facilitates children to be more independent self-learners, which encourages the lifelong learning skill of independent learning. (3)
* Through technology, the world not only became smaller but it came alive in the classroom. Technology played a key role in the development of interdisciplinary projects, assuring with 
other subject teachers that students use technology as an application for all other subjects. When the Internet and email accounts became available within our school, research and communication skills exploded, as well the borders between our country and the world suddenly disappeared!
* The textbooks cease to be the only source of all knowledge. Our teachers teach pupils to utilize various sources of information, to compare and combine them. The teacher becomes a coordinator of education; he is no more a mere lecturer or supervisor. DT helps to transfer part of the responsibility to the pupil. 

#### Highligts - negtive
* But not all has been good: our students have lost their innocence at an earlier age and bullying has been magnified through social networking explosions. (4)

Below is just about everything you'll need to style in the theme. Check the source code to see the many embedded elements within paragraphs. (4)

### 2. Changing relations

New technologies are – directly or indirectly – influencing all sorts of relationships in the school (between students, teachers, students and teachers, between the leaders and the staff) and beyond it (new opportunities for communication between schools and parents influenced their relationships as well, namely developing their trust in schools). (7)

Students don't expect teacher to know everything. Teachers now know thier learners better: *"We 
know more about each other and we all try to understand each other"*. The teacher+s authority comes from their other qualities. In modified role they are knowledgable advisors, partners, mediators who organize process, suggest guidelines, evaluate performance, help student to identify and solve problems and understand different concepts in broader contexts.

Tehachers became relieved of some administration.

Teachers form small communities to solve particular problems, to learn together, to conduct projects, to promote new opportunities and priorities (such as inclusive education), to research, understand, and improve learning and achievements of their students and themselves. 

#### Highlights
* Teachers can act like teachers (make questions, suggest guidelines, evaluate kids performance, help kids understand concepts, explain how to perform a specific procedure) while kids are using ICT, regardless of the teacher knowing or not knowing the details inside subject or topic that kids are learning. (7)
* Pupils have a sense of responsibility, of team spirit and a high portion of solidarity while working in teams, and thus their work has improved. To achieve a better result they help each other and support each other. Sometimes they work more than is required, and they enjoy the work. By using digital technology (DT) we can create diverse assignments while increasing the level of difficulty. The underachieving pupils have better chances to learn, and eventually to excel. The 
pupils who are not very good at solving traditional assignments are often skilled with computers and other DT. They enjoy success; failure is not that apparent, the pressure of wrong answers disappears. Relationships between teachers and pupils become more relaxed. Pupils often feel they are in charge of their own education. DT improves communication on all levels. Pupils also communicate at home; they ask questions. New friendships arise – at least on the virtual level – we know more about each other and we all try to understand each other. 


### 3. What did not happen? What happened unexpectedly?

Expectations that didn't happen:
* the quality of the new learning outcomes would be apparent more quickly. > but transformation takes time (8)
* Traditional pedagogy to more quickly and easily transform into new pedagogy, which respects and harnesses the potential of ICTs. > didn't happen
*  Newly graduated teachers haven't brought more digital expertise and innovative thinking and practice from their institutes of education, as it was expected.
*  The importance of the school and teachers haven't decrease at all, as some were afraid.

Many teachers and school leaders did not expect that:
* their role would change so abruptly and considerably - but the changeing relationships and atmosphere in the classrooms helped teacherd develop and quickly adapt to their nww, more challenging and responsible role.
* there would be the discussion about the roole, forms and needs of textooks, what they are and what they should be
* developing and deploying their own learning materials would be so standard, attractive, time consuming.
* social status of students' families would pay such strong influence on the access of the students to ICT, learning performance and achievements
* the digital content would play so important a role, and would be so expensive
* the legal issues of deploying ICTs would become so frequent, wide-ranging, and important
* the resistance of some of their colleagues to integrate ICT would be so strong 
and lasting. 
* the success and outstanding outcomes – both their own and of their school – would transform their lives so much: schools are frequently visited by parents, teachers from other schools, and researchers. Teachers are often invited to get involved in more and more initiatives and activities, to present at conferences, etc. (9)

#### Highlights
* If we compare a textbook and the Internet: the textbook is clearly intended for learning and lacks any distracting elements, while Internet is full of distraction. On the other hand even if we allow pupils to use the Internet, they prefer to ask the teacher; the teacher is still considered to be the more reliable source of knowledge and the answer is usually faster. We encourage pupils to consult the Internet when they have questions or they are looking for a solution to some problem. However, we are only partly successful. (9)
* the preparation of the lessons requires a significant amount of time, sometimes larger than using traditional methods.
* The technology changes so quickly that ther is hard to master the use of different tolls before there are new and improved models. 
* the infrastructure support needs a constant challenge tooo
* there is always need to finance the technological innovations
* if you have to book the ICT there is a possibility that it would not be available when needed.

## Videos of teachers/leaders talking about changes in their shool

Types of change, the impact they have seen in their shool (student engagement, new roles, curriculum impact, teacher's transformations, collaboration, learning beyond school)

### Jonathan Bishop, Broadclyst Primary School, UK

* collaboration, communication, problem solving become integral part
* the curriculum make children love school, want to learn more, they have more challenges

### Elizabeth Wagner de Huergo, American Institute of Monterrey

* more active, more enage, very creative
* they see each other in role as self learners
* teachers changed their focus on learners
* more collaborative environment
* teaching and learning has been transformed into a 24-7 process that occurs inside and outside the classroom walls

### Susan Skidmore, Interim Headteacher - Burnt Oak Primary School

* engagement > learning (taking that enthusiasm to every aspect of the curriculum)
* working accross the school (class 4 uses what class 6 has made)

## Changes in my environment

Changest that I expect to take place in my context: gradually a change in teaching and learning (at the moment there are many teachers who are not e-competent). But when the use of ICT will be something normal, this would happen (similar to other countries):

* engagement, motivation, solving real world problems
* students will develop their digital literacy
* more collaboration between teachers
* cross-curricular connections
* children would be more active and more creative
* working on more projects
* connections and collaboration: in the school, local environment, national, international level
* children will have therir own tablets
* they will control their learning
* teachers' role would be as moderators
* idividualization, differentiation
* teachers' will learn how to use technology

# 2.2.3 Changes (forum)

## Changes in Teaching and Learning
* lessons should have integrated into digital citizenship and internet safety (Joanna Ashlock)
* with freedom there comes the responsibilty (correct data, not outdated, citations, evaluation ...)
* blocking websites is not the right way, they should learn to use them safely
* students find another way to approach learning, they can learn at their own pace ... this helps them to become more independent learners (Sonia Sanchez)
* Nur Ali Tejani suggests to ask yourself three questions before you decide to use technology: "About the Subject/Topic/Theme (Is it required active learning, clarity of concept, real world issues, etc.); About the Learning styles of student; About the technology (what is available at home, at school and at large). Then trun into the technology deployedment in terms of tools, activities and pedagogy."
* " I think it is fundamental to include technology in the classroom not only because it is nice and fun, but also because we have to give the children tools to use technology wisely. Manychildren have access to gadgets that they don´t know how to use in a fruitful way. I think it is owr responsability toteach them to get the most out of the ipads or computers they have." (Gilda Lucia Carruba)
* Chung Sin Le: "This is my personal experience. My colleague from a different school was thinking of using technology in the assessment of science skills and concepts. When the idea was presented, it does not seem like the assessment is in science skills and concepts but assessing students' ability in using ICT in the science lesson. Has ICT transformed teaching and learning? Yes, it has and assessment too. Without a clear idea of ICT's role in teaching, learning and assessment, ICT is just fad and fashion."
* Eleni Papanastasiou: "When ICTs are integrated into the classroom, teaching and learning take another dimension. Students can learn both with the help of the tacher and on their own. They become more independent, as they base on their abilities and skills to do things and learning becomes a pleasant process."
* loss of handwriting skills?

## Changes in Educational Resources
* Deepti Khana: "ICT can provide a resource-rich environment and a learner-centered approach that together alter the teaching-learning relationship by significant dimensions. It supports different ways of learning, thinking and working across the curriculum, that enable diverse, creative and engaging forms of participation. School learners have already begun to anticipate the enormous gains, and to see the necessity for ICT skills, the tools they know they must have as adults in tomorrow’s economy and society. *"ICT offers students experiences available nowhere else".* The benefits are computer-generated simulations arise from using videodiscs, the Internet, and CD-ROM. Students are seen to learn problem-solving skills better than by traditional methods; they become competent in organizing complex information, recognizing patterns, drawing inferences and communicating findings. In the experience of the student users of ICT, tools – word processing, spread sheets and graphics – were used across most subjects, along with CD- ROMs for a variety of purposes, whether subject-specific or encyclopedic. Whatever the subject area, the small physical size and large capacity of CD- ROMs make them very appealing to students. Interactive encyclopedias were generally seen as effective in class, and user-friendly, even for those with little ICT experience."
* blended classroom
* flipped classroom

I think that nowadays teacher can choose betwen many resources (especially in english). He has to choose upon their quality. I think that children need a system (like the old fashioned (is it?) textbook - where everything is presented in similar way and he knows what to expect. There is still place for creativity and variety, but this sistem has to be the center of their learning. I don't think that textbooks will disappear, they will just change form to e-texbooks, not just digitalized paper texbooks, but texbooks made especially for e-learning. Beside this texbook teachers will use different tools for children's self-learning and creativity and developing digital/information literacy. So - it's not everything new, something old should stay as well, but in a different and improved form. But I think it's very important that the devices are of quality. I know that finances are the problem, but you can't expect from children to work well on device which is slow, the touch screen doesn't respond as good as it should, is slow and screen resolution is low. On the other hand, they don't need the newest and pricey devices. And I think that mobile phones are good just for ocasional use, not permanent - their screens are too small.

I think that now there are so many educational resources available, that teacher can get lost searching for one of quality that he could use in his own context. For example: there are many PowerPoint available online made by other teachers, but there are many badly prepared (too much text, errors and so on).

We should also take care of privacy issues, not just how the content is presented and if it it matches with curriculum.

## Changes in Relations between Teachers and Students
* active learners, not receptors of the teacher's knowledge
* in charge of their learning
* problem-based learning
* teachers as models to continuous learning

## Changes in School Life
* Technology is more accessible (libraries have computers that can be accessed by students any time)
* Imtiaz Fatima: "As school admin. spends a huge amount on ICT availability for students, they demand from teachers to use these resources more effectively. Now teachers need to take the responsibility of bringing effective changes in L& T methodologies using ICT."

## Changes in Physical Space
* children uses ipads ... at home
* computer labs
* i'm for a change from the use of technology in the computer lab to 1:1 use in classrooms
* mobile IT unit - before every student has his own tablet
* i don't believe in BYOD policy

## Changes in Student Motivation
* insreasing motivation
* Cary Hart: "I have found different levels of motivation.  In each grade level and with each age there are kids who are highly motivated by the iPads and ones who couldn't be bothered if they use them or not.  It somewhat depends on the application being used.  But I have found it interesting that this is the case. The few kids who are behaviour issues, would be behaviour issues regardless of the technology being present or not.  That is why I let the teachers decide the ways that they want to deal with the behaviour issues that arise in their rooms.  I have seen students who are being more creative with expressing themselves and are more confident with sharing information with others.  The iPad allows them as well to share from anywhere so if you have a student who doesn't like standing in front of a class they can do presentation from another location and still have it appear on the board at the front."
* Uta Enneking-McQuillan: "I agree with Cary. Motivation levels differ. Today I had a student, who is equipped with his own ipad, request to do a poster, on paper. He was tired of using the ipad. Another students was highly motivated when asked to design an app. He went to Pages, drew up an iphone with one of the symbols and couldn't be stopped."
* Heather McCartin: "I have seen students respond positively and negatively to new technology.  Some are so intimidated, they are content to watch, while others are willing to jump right in, even if that means making a mistake. For my high-end learners, many are motivated to do extra projects with the ICT, to enhance their curricular journey.  ICT has also helped my struggling students through simulations, practices, and demos. ICT can often give students a one-on-one tutor type scenario, where many can self govern themselves during whole class instruction."
* Maureen Clement: "Kids don't want to put the resources down.  They come in during their breaks and lunch to use the ICT and do more with it. They are motivated to engage with it and enjoy doing so as much as possible."
* Deepti Khanna: "Usage of ICT makes students more motivated and enthusiastic, particularly when they use digital tools independently to solve problems. Contextual problems created interest and relevance and an authentic need to use digital tools. ICTs that supported tasks with more than one possible solution and opportunities to publicly share, illustrate and/or manipulate findings, provided rich opportunities for students to become more active and absorbed in their learning.
There is a significant difference in student motivation which is based on gender, class standing, and prior experience of using ICT."
* Alice Witherow: "We have found that children are more motivated to write using an iPad. In particular improving their work by editing has produced better results particularly for less able children. We think it is to do with the ease with which things can be corrected but also the simple fact that they are better at reading printed typeface rather than their own handwriting so they have better access to the printed word, and are therefore more motivated to participate in editing as the results are more evident. It was an outcome we did not expect but nod that really improved learning outcomes."
* Alexa Joyce: "I don't work in a school, but I've been involved in a lot of ICT in education research projects. So I'll share my observations from these projects. Many of the points that the others already raised in the forum (like the comments from Helena, Robin, Cary) are similar to what I have seen, i.e. motivation typically goes up compared to more traditional techniques, as it's a new experience and so students are more attentive. This is similar to the effect though of introducing any new or unfamiliar activity. Motivation tends to be less impacted over time, as the use of ICT becomes more "normal" and students are thus less enthused. I've also noticed that motivations increases more among boys than girls on average, and more among younger students than older ones. The latter two points I saw in a qualitative study though, not in a large-scale statistically representative survey like the one Diana presented earlier in the course. Finally though, ICT per se is not the motivating factor I believe, it's the variety of applications, approaches and resources which can be introduced through the use of ICT. It means that forms and modalities of learning can be greatly varied, which makes it more engaging for students in general. Something which I haven't looked at in detail - but it would be interesting to investigate, is if ICT can be demotivating for students who aren't familiar with using ICT for leisure purposes. They might find it more a hindrance than a help if they don't have the basic skills they need." *> Answer by Diana Laurillard:* "Actually I doubt that last point Alexa. All young people learn how to use computers very easily. When we first had micocomputers in universities we used to run a weekly session for a local school - the students were 12-14 years old, from a school for children with behavioural problems, who had often been excluded from mainstream schools. Their teachers were amazed at how well-behaved they were, and when they went back to their school how proud they were to show off the (teletype) output they'd created, and how this behaviour then transferred to their other lessons. That was an important lesson for me in the power of ICT for motivation. But computers were nowhere at that time, other than in universities, and we used them for teaching basic maths and English with these students."
* It's important to have competent teachers before sending computers to schools as it happened in Spain.
* Belal Sweileh: "I expect increased motivation in students when incorporating ICT in the day-to-day school environment. My fear is that what we see as motivation is merely being intrigued by something new. That is, as soon as ICT becomes something routine that students see and use day-to-day, it won't motivate anymore. I think that the focus of schools shouldn't be on ICT per se, rather on engaging and quality teaching practices. However, part me suspects that solving the issue of student motivation will not happen in the setting of mass schooling and a mandated curriculum - for how fair is it that we expect students to be motivated when they have no choice in what they learn and when they learn it? Read the work of John Holt, John Taylor Ghatto, Ivan Illich, and others on this topic for more."
* Christina Klimedioti: "By using the ICT tools in my classroom , i noticed that my students were more confident and motivated. They wanted to learn more. Even the showed me new web 2.0 tools. I couldn't imagine that all students would be interested in leaning through new technologies. Low-grade students improved a lot and that was a surprise for me. They were able to create communication skills that they didn't have before. I was impressed.  I think that ICT is literally breaking down the walls of the classroom."
* 

