---
layout: post
title: "w1.3: The 21st Century Shool"
description: "the 21st century shool"
modified: 2013-05-31
category: articles
tags: [ICT, primary school, 21st Century, e-maturity]
image:
  feature: abstract-3.jpg
  credit: dargadgetz
  creditlink: http://www.dargadgetz.com/ios-7-abstract-wallpaper-pack-for-iphone-5-and-ipod-touch-retina/
comments: true
share: true
---

# WEEK 1: THE 21ST CENTURY PRIMARY SHOOL
{:.no_toc}

* Will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents" header
{:toc}

# 1.3.1 Stages a school goes through to develop a technologixally sophisticated school environment
"Progress may be slow, but when they maintain a strong link between pedagogy and technology, and recognise the true value of different ways of using ICT, all schools can use it to make a positive difference."

In the [Chapter 4. “Vignettes of Innovative Primary Schools” from the UNESCO book ICT in Primary Education, Volume 1: Exploring the origins, settings and innitiatives](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/ictinprimary/unesco_book/1.3.1%20Ch%204%C2%A0Vignettes%20ICT%20in%20Primary%20Education%20Vol%201.pdf) you can see some exsmples of different ways in which schools from 9 different countries use ICT.

I would like to present the one from The Great Britain: St Richards CE Primary School, UK, because I believe that is the way schools in Slovenia are heading to or are already there. ICT in this school is used as widely as possible, because they believe that “effective use of ICT across the curriculum can enhance teaching and learning experience”. They have each classroom equipped with an interactive whiteboard and a PC for pupils to use, digital cameras, video cameras and audio equipment. They are used by pupils to “supplement traditional written methods of presenting work.” They also offer laptops for whole class ICT activities or individual/small groups interventions. “They are housed in a mobile unit for ease of use in the classrooms rather than having a separate ICT suite.”

ICT in school is used in 5 ways:

1.  As a teaching medium.
2.  In ICT clubs, where pupils learn touch typing and how to use basic tools.
3.  As a resource to research information on the internet to broaden their understanding.
4.  As an interactive teaching tool for pupils who need extra support (they are developing interactive numeracy programs)
5.  LMS provides an interface that enables communication between teachers, parents and children. 

Teaching in school like this would be a perfect environment for a teacher who would like to use ICT for teaching and learning. I think that every teacher needs an interactive board, but in Slovenia not every teacher has even his own classroom. I can't imagine how to use ICT in your lessons, if you don't have your own classroom and you constantly move around the school, one hour you are in a classroom with an interactive board, another in one without it. You can't plan a lesson with using ICT, because everything can change and you won't be able to realise your planned lesson. And normally the youngest teachers are the ones without their own classroom ... and the youngest teachers are also the ones the most interested in the use of technology.

I love the idea of a mobile unit. There is something similar in the school I worked, but there were only 5 small laptops to borrow. Great for collaborative work, but not for 1:1 interaction. To laptops I would prefer tablets with seperate keyboards for easy typing.

There are slovenian schools using tablets for 1:1 teaching, but for now it's a minority. There are even some teachers who can't use technology at all, so it's not possible for 1:1 teaching to become a standard.

I love the idea of the way how ICT is used in this school (St Richards). I think this is the best way, maybe it will develop in 1:1 use of the technology devices in the future. But for now and for me as a teacher without (many) experiences in using technology, this is perfect.

# 1.3.2 The ideas and methods that could be relevant for the future policy on the use of ICT in Slovenian primary schools

## ELTE Gusztav Barczi SEN Elemementary School, Hungary

*For students with needing speech terapy. They are providing a playful learning environment integrated with ICT tools.*

* Interactive whiteboard, children are highly receptive to new technologies > they are able to develop more intensively than with any of other methodologies so far
* Very close ties with the Informatic Faculty – informatics students develop special needs applications according to the needs of school
* Teachers continuously take part in ICT courses for professional development, and build ties with international teaching communities with similar profiles

## Princess Rahma School, Jordan 

*Girl public school, vision to provide “young leaders who are qualified, educated, creative and able to learn continuously using ICT”.*

* Empowering studetns as leaders
* Open to new and innovative ideas
* Providing technical resources
* Variety of professional development opportunities
* Promoting 21st century skills through communication, collaboration, real life experiences
* Personalized learning (1:1)
* Cooperation with local community by conducting educational workshops
* Digital media to improve skills (Rosetta Stone for learning English language)

##American Institute of Monterrey, Mexico

*Children develop their knowledge and skills in five areas: academic potential, Wellness (social-emotional development, health, moral values …), Fine Arts (art), Sports, Technology and Multiculturalism (well-rounded education for 21st century).*

* Students use technology on regular basis to create, inform and communicate
* Focus on research and information fluency, creativity development, critical thinking, problem solving, communication, collaboration, digital sitizenship, technological operations and concepts
Technology of Education Centre, Russian Federation: for students who cannot visit school on a regular basis due to their health conditions – they learn at a distance in a Moodle-based environment.
* Constantly using ICT, the example is production of an animated movie.

## Beacon Primary School, Singapore

*Part of the Future Schools Singapore program – is the model for other schools for “innovative transformation of the education experience that leverages on ICT” and works closely with the Ministry of Education and Indocomm Development Authority*

* Staff recruited with the previous experiences with ICT and with passion for innovative educational practices
* 1:1 computing learning environment (to grade 3 they get a computer from school, older have their own laptops, bought from their parents)

## School for live, Slovakia

* Close to nature
* Joyful learning – their vision is “responsible freedom of the pupils, self-reliance and collaboration: each child is an active, independent and creative learner”
* Environment is rich of digital technologies, which are used to support educational goals and help to create innovative learning environments, support high order thinking and skills like communication, creativity, collaboration

## St. Andrew’s Anglican School for Boys, South Africa

* Classes do not exceed 25 learners
* All learners visit the computer centre weekly
* Mastering computer skills by integrating the content taught in various subjects and allowing boys to use various forms of technology

## Jamestown Elementary School, USA

*Mission is to “educate all children in an optimal learning environment, preparing them for success in a global society”*

* They use technology to “make learning engaging, relevant, and connected to real lives”
* Digital learning is at centre of pedagogical innovation
* Classrooms are equipped with digital toolkits (mobile devices, laptops, interactive whiteboards)
* Multidisciplinary, collaborative learning experiences, they work together to learn
* Gobal learning: linking them with students from around the world

# 1.3.3 How a school develops their capacity for integratin ICT
Reasons to begin using ICT are external, internal, educational or all three (see previous post: 1.2). "Whatever the reason, there will be progressive stages of ICT maturity, as the school builds infrastrucutre, rescources and teacher skills to use it well."

## The 21st Century Shool Environment

In the 21st Century there should be more collaborative work.

Computer is much nicer and more powerful tool than a book.

We should ask ourselves how can we make sure that all children (in local, national, international context) benefit from what ICT can offer.
One way to track the development of ICT integration is to run an annual survey across a representative sample of school. 
* In UK: Becta (government agency) used to be responsible for this. > We need to know how the capacity of the school system is developing > analysis of e-maturity (infrastructure, organizational coordination, engaging the learner)-

**- E-maturity = “way of assessing how far a school has come on the journey towards effective integration of ICT, and at what different kinds of classrooms look like, according to how they are**

Without the explicit support and action from government, the use of ICT in schools does not just happen by itself.

**Infrastructure: tools, connectivity - without this nothing can happen**

The best infrastructure: Norway, Portugal, Finland.

* IITE Survey (ICT in Primary Education, ch. 1: Setting the Context) on e-maturity: Infrastructure and resources - lessons learned:
  - Put ICT devices in the library ad access halls so everyone sees children working on computers.
  - Give teachers and students 1:1 access asap.
  - Technical support ensures proper functioning of any electronic device, connectivity and access to the school LMS/VLE system.

Technical support is very inportant because the teacher has to be sure that everything will work. Technical quality is crucial.

E-maturity: organisational co-ordination > what the teachers are doing to integrate ICT (how ICT resources are used and managed + culture of school). On e-maturity surveys asks questions like:
* how important role would you say ICT plays in teaching at your school for your subject/level?
* how confident would you say teachers at the school are in the use of ICT in delivering the school curriculum?
* in planning the content of lessons for your subject proportionately how much use is made of digital resources?

* European Schoolnet: Survey of school: ICT in Education. The study was carried out for the European Commission and was the first for many years. It's a snapshot across EU countries to find out the position of ICT in education. 
  - **Slovenia: ICT training: 4. place, but teachers are doubtful of their digital competence. This shows that it's teachers who develop their digital competence alone, not in school. They know what ICT can do, they are confident enough to use it, but they don't know how to use it critically. For that they need more help.**
 
**Teachers e-competence is as much important as technological infrastructure.**

The UNESCO research showed that shools offer to their teachers excellent suppot:

- they have computers/iPads to use web tools
- VLE and software is accessible 24/day
- teachers can borrow a computer/iPad for afterschool work for experimenting with apps and for learning design.
This is e-maturity in primary school.

Access to the world web is very important, because not every student can access it at home.

Make it short: 21st century school is very different form that of the 19th century. ICT can make a lesson more variable and challenging for a teacher. This is the reason why we should look at policy.

* [e-Learning Foundation](http://elearningfoundation.publishpath.com/): "A charity that sets out to inspire and support schools and families to take positive action so that the education of every child is enhanced by good access to, and use of, learning technologies when and where they need them. 

It offers advice and guidance to schools on how to run a 1-1 access programme that is equitable for all families. 

It runs a Donation Management Service (DMS) that enables schools to support 1-1 tablet access even for disadgantaged children. It does this by taking over the administrative burden of making regular collections from parents, to create provision for all children to have their personal access to a computer."

>ICT and the 21st Century school environment – some of the issues
1.  A 19th C schoolteacher would not feel at all at home in a 21st C classroom.
2.  The model now is more often group work with one or more teachers and assistants moving around to help children with their work
3.  Children learn literacy skills so that they can learn from books for themselves; they learn digital literacy so that they can learn from computers for themselves.
4.  There is never enough investment to enable every school to change at the same pace.
5.  Even within the western industrialised countries of Europe, with a degree of political and economic similarity, there is the full range from total provision to no provision of ICT in primary schools.
6.  Give teachers and students one-to-one access as soon as possible – 1-1 teacher access makes an enormous difference because the teacher feels ownership of the computer and what they can do with it. And it’s just the same for the student. 
7.  ICT enables students to use a range of skills in one class: teamwork, operating a computer, information skills, media skills, literacy skills, and the judgment to put all that together to answer the overall question.
8.  With ICT each child can work at their own pace and level, they can get on with the activity learning independently, but also have some support from the teacher when they need it.
9.  ICT gives the children the chance to see what a primary classroom looks like in another country, and to exchange ideas and experiences directly with children from another culture.
10. Teachers can do a lot with even quite small and cheap mobile devices that can be connected to the internet. 
11. Teachers know what ICT can do, they have the confidence to use it, but how to use it effectively for the important aspects of children’s education? That’s where they need more help than they are currently getting.
12. Primary schools are changing –slowly, it’s true, but digital technologies are now making classroom learning more varied and challenging, and also much more challenging for the teacher. 
These statements are extracts from the audio-slide presentation ‘The 21st century school environment’.

## 1:1 access (forum)
* If financially possible 1:1 is the best way, if not, it’s still better 1:2 or 1:3 than nothing (more students on one device means more collaboration, improve social skills, less distratction from the task, they help each other with technical problems, but there’s a problem if some device doesn’t work for some reason)
* 1:1 means individualisation, this is the only way for using e-texbooks, students have ownership on what they do
* I believe that one-to-one is better for older students, younger can work in pairs or group to know the technology and become confident in using it. When technology is not constantly used, 1:more is OK, but when it’s used all the time (e-textbooks, e-portfolios …) – it’s very important for each student to have his own device. I think it’s the same as have one textbook for two children. They learn better if they have one of their own, but if they are sharing one, it also works. When working in groups, they can work on one device and share the outcome with others – or work in the cloud.
* Daniel Carr suggests to think on devices as pencils. It’s better to have one of your own.
* Maria Laura Scasso pointed out that in her school the board is afraid of using children’s own devices in school. They think that children are going to break them or that the devices will disappear and school would be responsible. 
My answer: It's sad, but it is the reality in most cases. But the devices, used in school, should have some way of insurance in case they broke, they are stolen ...
The problem is also what if someone forget to charge them and they don't work.
Things like that can't happen with textbooks. Normally no-one would steal the paper notebook :), but it happens that students lose them and if they do, they have to pay for a new one. And the paper notebooks/texbooks always works, you just open them, there are no problems with internet connectivity, low battery, missing program, forgetting password.
But i think that if it's financially possible, we should have use mobile devices, if possible in 1:1 ratio, especially for older students.

## What if student doesn't want to use technology (forum)
I didn't like Maths but I had to learn it. Or I didn't like the book we had to read, but I have read it anyway. It's not always about what students would like to do, there are some things that important that they should do it anyway. And it's important to learn how to use technology for learning, creativity, collaboration, communication ... I believe that if someone don't like to use technology it's because he doesn't feel confident in it, so maybe you should try with easyer tasks, differentiation, personalization, in the beggining you can even offer two ways to compete the task: with technology or without. When he will see other children soo enthusiastic about the use of technology and their creativity, I hope that he would like to use technology too.

# E-maturity in Slovenia
Searching for e-maturity in Slovenia I have found 2 documents/researches, one made by the [University of Maribor](http://raziskavacrp.uni-mb.si/rezultati-os/zakljucek.htm) and another one by [European Schoolnet](https://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/sites/digital-agenda/files/Slovenia%20country%20profile.pdf), both from 2011 (I hope now we would have better results).
So:

* ICT is integrated in slovenian schools – at some schools more, at other less
* computer-student ratio in grade 4 it is 12,7 computers on 100 students in grade 4 and 40,2 on grade 11 (EU: 14,5 and 33,6).
* There is no enough money for quick improvement on ICT-infrastructure
* At the beginning, few schools get needed ICT-infrastructure (hardware, software, e-textbooks and applications) and teacher development on ICT use, research programme and so on, and then gradually other schools
* Another problem is lack of educational software and courseware in Slovenian language – this is one of the most important reasons why ICT in Slovenian schools is not used more
* Program Informatizacija slovenskega šolstva (Computerization of Slovenian school system) has an aim to raise the level of computerization in slovenian schools – so there will be more efficient school system with better infrastructure, there’s also a plan to teach teachers and students to efficiently use technology and curriculum renovation
* educational infrastructure is not used efficiently. Computers ares used in only 25 % of the lessons or less. 6,5 % schools don’t use computers for teaching/learning at all.
* 75 % of computers in schools is available to students for teaching in the classroom or in their free time
* The most important issue is to teach and motivate teachers for using technology.
* In terms of equipment, students in Slovenia have lower levels of access compared to EU but higher levels of high-speed broadband provision. Level of connectedness (website/VLE) are higher than the EU.
* Frequency of use of technology by teachers: generally above the EU mean, but use by students is lower
* Confidence in ICT skills: around EU mean for students and teachers, teachers are more confident than students
* Professional development in ICT: uneven
* Support measures for using ICT in teaching and learning: a higher percentage of students than the EU mean at all grades are in schools with ICT coordinators and they tend to be rewarded more than the EU average
* **Overall: many Slovenian students are in schools with strong policies and support for ICT, but this is not always reflected in high levels of ICT use, even though home access and use tend to be high, owing to relatively low levels of equipment provision.**
* The analysis suggests 5C approach to addressing the issues above:

  - Capacity building (investment in teachers’ professional development)
  - Concrete support measures (accompanying specific policies at school level)
  - Combined policies and actions
  - Country-specific support (large differences and degrees of ICT provision and implementation)
  - Competence development

This is the statistics, but I think that for teachers who would like to use ICT in teaching and for learning, environment is supporting. National Education Institute Slovenia and Ministry of Education are working on many e-learning projects: Innovative pedagogy 1:1 for 21st century competences, EUfolio, e-textbooks, e-schoolbag ... And not to forget: there is also project with European comission: Opening up Slovenia: "The “OpeningUpSlovenia” case study framework will foster research activities through all aspects of open education, allowing rigorous, transparent, and replicable testing of open learning environments, scientific open education theories, new business models and organisational forms, open education computational tools, and new and emerging technologies for the educational technologies market place." [(source)](http://www.k4all.org/openingupslovenia/)

There are two important conferences for slovenian teachers on the use of ICT in education: SirIKT and Information Society. The useful webpage for teachers is sio.si. There is lots of information about e-education.