---
layout: post
title: "W4.3: Digital content"
description: "digital content - how to use, teachers' experiences, LMS"
modified: 2014-06-17
tags: [digital content, ICT, LMS, e-portfolio]
image:
  feature: evelyn flint rose.jpg
  credit: Evelyn Flint/Texture Time
  creditlink: www.flickr.com/photos/texturetime/
comments: true
share: true
---

Week 4: TECHNOLOGY OPPORTUNITIES

4.3 DIGITAL CONTENT

Instructor: Ivan Kalas and Ernesto Laval

{:.no_toc}

* Will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents" header
{:toc}

# How do schools use digital content?

## Issues

### Digital content

* its importance and value is sometimes underestimated
* is one of the key components of the whole process
* must

  - stimulate various aspects of the learning process (support creativity, collaboration, 21st C skills)
  - be sensitive to cultural and religious values
  - inspire by providing unprecedented opportunities to discover, communicate, express themselves, model, observe, solve, simply to learn and develop

Experienced teachers combined digital and non-digital resources. This is a must for productive learning.

### Choosing and using digital content
Schools digital content:

* mostly: digital libraries of images and other data, multimedia resources, educational applications (simulations, interactive microworlds, games, subject-specific apps)
* formats: presentations, text documents, web sites, comics, puzzles, multimedia resources ...
* only few schools have have explicit set of rubrics to access the content and inform the process of its selection
* most important about content: supports interactivity, creativity, how much it meets and encourages the individual needs of the students, and naturally the way how we use it in our classes. Students should have access to the content also from home or from anywhere and whenever they want to.
* it must be compatibile with their pedagogy: software should be interactive, allowed different actions, kids should be inspired to explore without having to give only correct answers.
* teachers' collaboration

### Developing
Teachers often develop their content. They create presentations, photos, mind maps, podcasts, tests, quizzes.
They use various authoring tools and even programming development tools for interactive microworlds, games.

Sometimes the content is developed by students themselves: for themselves, for others, for younger pupils (constructivism)

### Major challenges
* language
* possible adaptations
* tendency to open content and open educational resoruces is recognizable almost everywhere
* finantial issuses
* quality issues: good, appropriate 
* support creativity, collaboration, multiple solutions
* support special education needs

### LMS
Important as a means to delivery the digital content to their students.

4 levels of using school LMS:

* for teachers: 

  - post assignments
  - manage, store, spread, share digital content
  - collect students' work
  - administer the teaching/learning process
  - e-portfolios, e-diaries, grading lists, blogs

* for students:

  - facilitate their learning process
  - post their work
  - get material
  - communicate

* for parents:

  - monitor the content
  - observe the progress of their children
  - home-school communication

## E-portfolios

* evidence what students upload
* comments
* everything in one place

# Teachers' experience of using digital content

*Read Section 2.4 Digital Content: Choosing and using and Section 2.5 Digital content: Getting, buying, sharing and developing of [ICT in Primary Education Vol 2, Ch 2: Technology opportunities](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/ictinprimary/unesco_book/Chapter_2_Technology_opportunities.pdf), which summarizes the responses to our survey about how schools choose digital content and what they use it for. It also explores the questions of how schools get the content, how they share it, and quite often also - how they develop it by themselves.*

Look at W4.2 - tam je že vse povzeto.

# Decisions: how to provide digital content

Assume he following case: You are a decision maker at a national level and have been asked to propose a combination of strategies that would allow schools to have access to the digital content. 

These are the possible strategies:

* Distribute money directly to schools: Schools have autonomy to contact local vendors and buy directly what they decide they need.
* Do centralised purchases: Central government acquires technology from vendors and distribute technology to schools (and thus they might get 50% lower prices than school purchases).
* Invest in the development of public information educational portals: Schools might have access to expert information and guidelines to find a good selection of free educational content from all over the world
* Fund expert groups that would professionally develop high quality content and make it freely available to all schools
* Support schools to develop their own digital content: Schools would receive training, support and tools to develop their own digital content.

## The strategy that should be better promoted in SLovenia
I think it should be a combination, some money should be distributed directly for shools for their own specific needs. If the content is very good, even the centralised purcahses is a good option. Having all children the same content would help teachers with sharing content and ideas. I think that having access to expert information and guidelines from all over the world is a must. There should be expert groups to develop high quality content for different subjects as well to make digital content according to national curriculum. When necessary, schools should have a support to develop their own content and in this case receive training, support and tools. But this could be the come money as for no.1: money distributed directly to schools to use it the way they think to be the best.

## How to provide digital content (forum)

### Distribute money directly to schools
* Connie Bonnici: administrators will make sure that this is used by teachers and students; administrator can deal for support and training for teachers by the supplier of the technology; teachers will be more willing to use this technology as this was their own choice.
* Jacqueline Samuels: schools can purcahse the tools which would most directly meet their needs (they only need a capable team in charge of the funding)

>I do agree with all comments above. Giving money directly to schools give them an option to choose the content which is the most suitable for their teachers' and students' needs. It's the same as giving the teachers the options to choose which textbook are they going to use. There are many available, few confirmed from the government, and teachers' choose beetwen them the one they think it's the best and the most suitable for their needs. In my country it's still the problem of all teachers of the same subject using the same textbook - and some teachers are not ready for change, they like to use the same old textbook because having a new (even if the better one) would mean to preapre all their lecutres anew. But it's still logical that in the same school all the students use the same textbooks, I think there is the problem in teachers, not the system.

> There is also an option e): support schools to develop their own content: schools would receive training, support and tools to develop their own digital content. I think that the money from this option (an option a)) can be used also for an option e - the school leaders could use the money for buy the content they need and also to develop their own content.

> Still, I think that a government should give some money to develop high quality content. But it still should be an option to choose between diferent forms of content (as we can now choose between different textbooks).

### Support school to develop their own digital content
* Isabel Sanz Fombellida: "In my opinion is the best idea as schools will create and share their materials. The huge amount of information and activities in a year will be incredible!
Although, the money that the government will need to use is higher as they need to support   every single school."
* Cibele: "I  also think that by training and engaging e professionals to build their digital content, it  is possible to better address the issues in each different context. There are some contents that are "universal", but the teaching staff will have more information to develop the best possible content."

> I don't think this will happen in Slovenia. But I think the government should have the money distributed directly to schools for:
a) buy the content they need directly by it's producers
e) to support shools to develop their own digital content (they use the money for training, support, tools).

>In this way they can have for some subject the content bought, bot for another one they can make one of their own. 

### Do centralised purcahses
* most cost efficient
* the fear of monopolisation (but: Microsoft ...)

> If the content is of the best quality and meets the standards of the national curriculum, this could be the most effective option for content (putting aside teachers' wish to choose the content they teach with) and there would be more money to spend on tools, for example to give every student his own tablet or something to learn with.

### Invest in professional development of content
* Cibele: "Professional development would probably be one of the best ways to enhance quality content in a class. By hiring people with pedagogical experience as well as programming/design, it is possible both to personalize the content to the school criteria and methodologies (neo/constructionism, Montessori, etc.) and transforming it in an engaging activity. Today, I don't know many professionals or companies which have both of these abilities but they are important to build a complete experience."
* Me: I agree with you, Cibele. Teachers NORMALLY couldn't make such a quality content on their own (even with much support from others), because they are not professionals in this field. They can help with their recommendations and observations, but they are not designers, developers ... And I think that teachers don't have time to do develop the content (of such quality).
* Jennifer Lagrange: "I chose this option would yield the greatest value because I am assuming the "experts" would understand the needs of the schools and be capable of developing appropriate digital content for them. Schools could then freely access this material to use with its students. Hopefully, the money invested would be enough to allow them to develop a variety of digital content such that schools would have choices which correspond to their local needs. Furthermore, it would be great if students (and their parents) could also access this content from home as well as at school."

### Hybrid strategies
Piotr Mitros: "I wanted to open up a thread for other hybrid strategies as well. Centralized strategies don't work well; they're too authoritative, and they don't work well in local contexts. Distributed strategies don't work well either; schools generally do not have resources to evaluate ICT solutions, and create all resources themselves. 

I'll go first: 

1. I would provide a centralized purchasing strategy with a recommended hardware and software solution with centralized IT support. Schools would be permitted to deviate from that strategy to whatever extent they chose. 
2. I would provide a centralized training strategy. The goal of that strategy would be to, in addition to basic training, to building communities of practice where teachers could support each other, and exchange best practices. 
3. I would provide a set of centrally-created open digital resources in a common portal, and developed around the recommended technology solution. Teachers would be invited to enhance and build on those resources, both for their own classrooms, and to contribute back to the pool. "

# LMS as a means to deliver content

*A Learning Management System (LMS) is regarded as the school’s central software hub of the teaching and learning activities. It is a computer system used for administration, documentation, reporting, and managing the educational process. One of its important functions is to manage, distribute, and deliver digital content to students - and sometimes also to parents, to provide them with the opportunity to observe the learning content and progress of their children.*

*Read Section 2.2 Integrating LMS of ICT in [Primary Education Vol 2, Ch 2: Technology opportunities](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/ictinprimary/unesco_book/Chapter_2_Technology_opportunities.pdf), which summarizes the responses to our survey about how teachers perceive the LMS and how is it being used.*

The study reveals that **a deeper understanding of the potential of ICT to support learning and development of the pupils manifests in seeking and demanding higher functionality of the supporting ICT, including technical infrastructure and learning management system**. Four levels of development can be recognized here: 

1. few schools do not use any LMS and are not aware of its need so far; 
2. some schools are still not using any particular system but already practise some of its basic functionality – like simple file-sharing and e-mail communication; 
3. some schools have already started using an LMS, mostly for posting homeworks and teaching materials, and for communication with their pupils; 
4. many schools are profound users of wide functionality of an LMS. 

They most often use it: 

* For teachers – to post assignments and homework; to manage, spread and share primary and supplementary digital content; to collect the pupils’ work; to support and administer the teaching/learning process (engaging e-portfolios, e-record books, e-diary, grading lists, weblogs, webinars...); to post and share school news and achievements etc. 
* For pupils – to help them administer their learning and personal development; to facilitate their cooperation and collaboration in projects; to post their work, solu- tions, and products; to communicate with teachers and with peers etc. Younger pupils often have one common class login; older pupils usually get personal login and password. 
* For parents – to observe the learning content and progress of their children; achievement and assessment (e-portfolios); to get into home-school communica- tion etc.
 
Most often schools use standard LMS platforms; sometimes they develop their own solution: The school has a very extensive LMS developed in-house by our IT Department, in response to our student-centred philosophy. (7)

## Highlights

* pupils and parents can find the homework
* if missing, he can see what is going on in the classes and what he pupils are asked to do or bring from home
* parents can see the assessment of their children or any comments from the teacher
* if the assignments in the classroom are solved by all of them together, children can re-do the same by themselves at home and deepen their knowledge
* all presentations
* electronic record books (7)
* students are able to administer their learning
* information on student performance (8)
