---
layout: post
title: "W4.1 Orientation to the week"
description: "orientation, definitions"
modified: 2014-06-16
tags: [ICT, m-learning, digital content, digital literacy, digital divide, computational thinking, educational programming, LMS, e-portfolio, authoring system, learning environment, tutor, constructionism, psychology, didactical engineering, assessment, feedback, gmbl, informal learning, inquiry learning, learning design, learning grid, LMS, learning object, learning scenario, learning space, multimedia, storytelling, networked learning, PLE, self-regulated learning, simulation]
image:
  feature: abstract-3.jpg
  credit: dargadgetz
  creditlink: http://www.dargadgetz.com/ios-7-abstract-wallpaper-pack-for-iphone-5-and-ipod-touch-retina/
comments: true
share: true
---

Week 4: TECHNOLOGY OPPORTUNITIES

4.1 ORIENTATION TO THE WEEK

Instructor: Ivan Kalas and Ernesto Laval

{:.no_toc}

* Will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents" header
{:toc}

# 4.1.1 What is the focus for this week?

## Technology opportunities
* different categories of ICT and how schools choose new technology and for what purpose
* criteria to consider the appropriateness of an ICT tool
* what we need in our classrooms
* digital content
* experinence of using ICT to support the development of early computational thinking of pupils
* plans for further extending my digital environment

## Technology oportunities (video)

### Short recapitulaton

#### The essence of the whole course

* know how to **develop**, **improve**, and **share** various strategies for ICT-based teaching and learning
* think about how to enhance primary students' learning using digital technologies

#### Week 1

* Think about the reasons for using ICT
* Understand the process of integration of ICT (different stages of technological and pedagogical sophistication of a school and it's teachers)

#### Week 2

* Indetify different dimensions of change
* be aware of new opportunities
* ... and needs for continuous professional development

#### Week 3

* Think about pedagogical changes achievable through ICT
* Think about how to harness potential of ICT for learners (different ways, their value for the learners)

#### Week 4

* choosing technology
  - what is **developmentally appropriate** technology
  - different categories of ICT
  - how to choose it, criteria
  - how much technology we need
* digital content
  - how to choose it and for what 
  - how to provide it to schools
  - should we develop the content by ourselves?
* computational thinking and edu programming
  - belongs to **important skills for 21st C learning**
  - programming, robotics, exploiting digital tools
* think about future plans
* discuss with experienced teachers

### Goals for this week
"We will consider this week successful if you rethink whe way ICT is being chose for your shool. There are several factors to take into consideration:

* what else do my students need?
* how much technology do we need to beter meet our learning goals?
* do we have the content our students need?
* do we use and deliver it properly?
* do we create opportunities for our students to develop all important skills?
* what have I learned from others?
* what have I shred?"

[## Basic concepts on ICT](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YNMzGp5uTtTWdw5lsMTfTDzOyus6JDJWSvMevcwhh4g/edit#)

ICT
Digital technology
Digital content
Digital divide
Digital literacy
Computational thinking
Educational programming
LMS (Learning Management System)
e-portfolio (digital portfolio)

### ICT

Although frequently used, this term has different interpretations in different contexts. In our research and our MOOC context we concentrate our attention on studying ICT in the context of education, where it usually refers to implementing ICT tools, techniques and equipment to support teaching, learning and other cognitive activities.

### Digital technology

ICT is often perceived from two sides, or two wings: the technology as an **information medium** and the technology as a **construction medium**. As S. Papert pointed out in his Logo Philosophy and Implementation in 1999, education itself has two wings which also could be called **informational** (getting information and skills) and **constructional** (creating, discovering, constructing knowledge). Although both wings are equally important, the constructional side is sometimes undervalued. Therefore, more and more people use the term digital technologies instead of ICT to emphasize the need for balance between informational and constructional sides of their integration into education.

In our research projects and in this MOOC we understand ICT in a broad and well-balanced sense that includes both informational and constructional sides and we use ICT and digital technologies as synonyms.

### Digital content

From the broader perspective, digital content is any type of content that exists in the form of digital data. In the context of education, we usually refer to **digital libraries** of images and other data, all sorts of **multimedia resources**, and **educational applications** for simulations, interactive microworlds, games… and various subject-specific applications. Most usual formats to deliver the content are presentations, text documents, web sites, comics, puzzles, and multimedia libraries. What is also important in our educational content: digital content should facilitate and boost the development of all various skills important for the 21st century learning.
Teachers often stress that the most important is how much the digital content supports interactivity, collaboration, and creativity, how much it meets and encourages individual needs of the students, how much it respects cultural and religious differences, how much it stimulates various aspects of the learning process.

### Digital divide

gap between those individuals and communities that have, and do not have, access to the information and communication technologies. It includes the imbalance both in **physical access** to technology and the resources, and **skills** needed to effectively participate as a ‘digital citizen’. Digital gap has many material and social implications and influences lives of all of us.

### Digital literacy

comprises knowledge, skills and understanding necessary for **appropriate**, **safe** and **productive** usage of digital technologies for learning and discovering – in our profession and in everyday private life.

It is a collection of competencies to:

* meaningfully engage various digital tools for our own needs and our personal development,
* effectively solve tasks and problems in the digital environment,
* choose and apply appropriate technology for finding information, processing it, applying, sharing or creating,
* critically evaluate and analyse information obtained from the digital sources,
* understand social implications (including safety, privacy protection and ethics), which emerge in the digital world.

### Computational thinking

is perceived (see, for example, Centre for Computational Thinking, Carnegie Mellon, www.cs.cmu.edu/~CompThink/) as thought processes involved in:

* solving problems, designing systems, and understanding human behaviour that draws on concepts fundamental to Computer Science or Informatics,
* creating and making use of different levels of abstraction, to understand and solve problems more effectively,
* thinking algorithmically and with the ability to apply mathematical concepts such as induction to develop more efficient, fair, and secure solutions,
* understanding the consequences of scale, not only for reasons of efficiency but also for economic and social reasons.

In our research, we study the programming component in the context of computational thinking development in the primary school, namely its content, practices and pedagogies.

### Educational programming

in the context of education, we perceive programming as a **tool for thinking, exploring, and socializing, as an opportunity to create new playful learning opportunities.**

The meaning of the word programming – and definitely, programming itself – has gone through considerable transformations during recent 20 to 30 years. Beside **professional programmers**, we have recently been recognizing increased number of computer users who are not professional programmers but routinely use various scripting languages or macro languages, build large and complex applications within standard spreadsheet program, use various configuration tools to customize the behaviour of the programs they use etc. This phenomenon has increasingly been described as **end user programming**, see (Blackwell, 2002: What is Programming?).

However, these two perspectives on programming do not account for the primary and secondary school students as programmers and the reasons why they do so. Therefore, as a counterpart to professional programming and end user programming we tend to use **educational programming** to refer to programming, which has its own teaching/learning goals in primary or secondary education.

The way how children themselves perceive programming has also been recently transformed considerably. Edith Ackermann, renowned **constructivist and developmental psychologist**, in her recent research has studied how children use and think of programming as a means for exploring and optimizing the interplay between a human (usually themselves) and unequally responsive, surprising, or reliable devices, see (Ackermann, 2012: Programming for the natives: What is it? What’s in it for the kids?). She has identified three different roles of programming from the point of view of children:

* Mastering things – programming as giving instructions: Tell a computational device what to do, make things do things
* Animating things – programming as lending autonomy: Endow a device with a “mind of its own”, make it look out for itself
* Modulating things – programming as modifying: Do not start from scratch, modulate how things act or interact by tweaking some parts or parameters in their environment.

### LMS (Learning Management System)

in the school context, it is a complex software application for the administration, documentation, tracking, reporting, and supporting the learning process of our students, and also as a means to deliver and share the digital content with them. More experienced schools creatively exploit it for teachers to post assignments, manage, store, spread and share digital content, to collect students’ work and – in general – administer the whole teaching and learning process.
Naturally, LMS is being used by students as well – at many schools at a daily basis. However, some schools encourage also parents to use LMS as a means to monitor the content and observe the progress of the teaching and learning process, or as a platform for home-school communication.

### e-portfolio (digital portfolio)

a collection of electronic evidence assembled and organized by a teacher, usually on the Web or otherwise. Such electronic evidence may (in the context of ECE) include inputted images, photographs, sound recordings, various scanned products etc. It can serve as a type of learning record that provides actual evidence of achievement. E-portfolio can advance learning and development by providing children and teachers with a way to organize, archive and display pieces of work – over longer period of time. E-portfolios are becoming more and more popular because they offer practitioners and researchers the opportunity to review, communicate and assess the outcomes of children’s work.

[## TEL Dictionary](http://www.tel-thesaurus.net/wiki/index.php/TEL_Dictionary_entries)

### Adaptive learning environment

Draft 1
Editor: Marcus Specht, Open Universiteit Nederland

#### Definition
Adaptive Learning Environments are environments personalizing the instructional process on different instructional parameters as: sequence of tasks and task difficulty, time and type of feedback, pace of learning speed, reinforcement plan and others.

#### Comments on the history
Personalization of feedback and instruction has often been considered as a key feature in learning support. The adaptations of the instructional process to the individual and its different aspects have been investigated from different research perspectives as learner modelling, intelligent tutoring systems, adaptive hypermedia, adaptive instructional designs and others.

From the area of adaptive instruction and the psychology of learning adaptive methods and techniques in learning machines have been introduced and evaluated since 1950’s.These adaptive methods have been empirically evaluated and showed to increase learning speed and help students for better understanding through individualized instruction.

Research in Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) discussed such topics as acquiring information about the learning process, building cognitively adequate learner models, inferring information about learners, and developing effective recommendation and guidance strategies for personalized learning paths. In order to provide individualized feedback and support the development of problem solving competence in the target domains, ITSs are basically built on expert models of the problem domain. (Anderson, Conrad, & Corbett, 1989).

From early 90’s educational adaptive hypermedia systems (Brusilovsky, 1996) have been using mostly simpler models of learner knowledge and preferences to adapt presentation of hypermedia content, annotation of hyperlinks, sequencing of learning contents, or content recommendation. Early works taking into account social information for giving instructional guidance also came from the field of adaptive hypermedia as for example using information about the usage of learning content by other members of a learning community or peer group members.

In the last ten years the technology available and used by learners has dramatically changed. From simply taking into account the learner knowledge, preferences, goals, and other characteristics of the learner, the social context of learning has become much more important. Today adaptive learning environments start to make use of sensor information and other contextual information for supporting adaptation to the learners and their context of use. Furthermore social media have changed the availability of user information dramatically and using learning information for personalized reflection is a new development linked to research in Learning Analytics.

#### Related terms
Adaptive Systems, User Modeling, Adaptive Instruction, Adaptive Hypermedia

#### Translation issues
…/…

#### Disciplinary issues
Research issues about the design and the evaluation of adaptive learning environments are strongly multidisciplinary, bringing together research from computer science and engineering, psychology and psychotherapy, cybernetics and system dynamics, instructional design and empirical research on technology enhanced learning.

While Computer Science perspectives mostly focus on the development of better user models, and development of intelligent adaptation and media systems and algorithms, educational sciences mostly focus on the development, acceptance and evaluation of adaptive instruction algorithms. Furthermore Aptitude Treatment Interaction studies explored the effects of adapting instructional parameters to different characteristics of the learner (Tennyson & Christensen, 1988) as task performance, personality characteristics, or cognitive abilities.

The complexity which is raised by the convergence or possible conflicts between disciplines involved in research on adaptivity could be structured along methodological questions distinguishing means, target, goal and strategy (Specht 1998):

* Adaptation Mean: What information about the user is known, and what information can be used for adaptation?
* Adaptation Target: What aspect of the instructional system is adapted to the given information about the user?
* Adaptation Goal: Why does the system adapt to this information? Mostly, adaptive systems adapt to their user for ergonomic or pedagogical reasons.
* Adaptation Strategy: What steps are taken to adapt the system to the user, and how active or reactive are the user and the system in the adaptation process?

#### Key references
[1] Anderson, J. R., Conrad, F. G., & Corbett, A. T. (1989). Skill acquisition and the LISP tutor. Cognitive Science, 13, 467-505.

[2] Brusilovsky, B. (1996). Methods and Techniques of Adaptive Hypermedia. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 6(2-3), 87-129.

Specht, M. (1998). Adaptive Methoden in computerbasierten Lehr/Lernsystemen (Dissertation). Trier: University of Trier.

Tennyson, R. D., & Christensen, D. L. (1988). MAIS: An intelligent learning System. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Instructional Designs for microcomputer courseware. Hillsdale: N.J.:Erlbaum.

### Authoring system

Draft 1
Editor: Jan van der Meij, ELAN. Institute for Teacher Education and Science Communication, University of Twente
Contributors: Wouter van Joolingen, ELAN. Institute for Teacher Education and Science Communication, University of Twente

#### Definition
An authoring system is a computer-based system which allows creating (educational) software without the need for programming. Usually the author creates a learning environment by combining several available building blocks, each providing a template to specify its behavior.

#### Comments on the history
The term Authoring system is used for many different software tools. It is unclear who coined the term and when it was first used. We believe the first authoring systems were developed in the early eighties of the 20th century when the microcomputer became popular in education. By then, non-programmers (mainly teachers) wanted to be able to develop their own educational software without the need for programming. Guide (Hardman, Jones, & Winder, 1988) and Taiga (Pilot, 1988) are examples of the first authoring systems for Microsoft DOS based computers. Course of Action (the predecessor of AuthorWare, e.g., (Wolfe, 1992)) and HyperCard (Atkinson, 1987) are examples of the first authoring systems for Apple Macintosh computers. Around 1990 most authoring systems focused on the development of intelligent tutoring systems (ITS), like simulation-based learning environments and educational games. Examples are SimQuest (de Jong, van Joolingen, Veermans, & Van der Meij, 2005) and [Game Maker](http://www.yoyogames.com/studio) (Habgood & Overmars, 2006).

#### Related terms
Authoring environment, Authoring tool, Authoring language

#### Disciplinary issues
With the advent of the web, dedicated authoring systems are becoming less important. General web-based programming languages like Java, Java Script, and HTML5 are beginning to take over or already have. Authors can be supported by content management systems such as Plone, Joomla or Drupal, as well as specific course management systems such as Moodle or BlackBoard.

#### Key references
Atkinson, W. (1987). HyperCard. In Software for Macintosh Computers. Apple Computer Co, Cupertino.

[1] de Jong, T., van Joolingen, W. R., Veermans, K., & Van der Meij, J. (2005). Authoring discovery learning environments: In search for reusable components. In J. M. Spector & D. A. Wiley (Eds.), Innovations in Instructional Technology: Essays in Honor of M. David Merrill (pp. 11–28). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

[2] Habgood, J., & Overmars, M. (2006). The Game Maker's Apprentice: Game Development for Beginners. New York: Apress.

[3] Hardman, H. L., Jones, D. M., & Winder, R. (1988). Hypertext Tips: Experiences in Developing a Hypertext Tutorial.

[4] Pilot, A. (1988). TAIGA: Twente Advanced Interactive Graphic Authoring System. A New Concept in Computer Assisted Learning (CAL) and Educational Research. Doc 88-18.

[5] Wolfe, C. R. (1992). Using Authorware Professional for developing courseware. Behavior Research Methods, 24(2), 273–276.

### Cognitive tutor
Draft 1

Editor: Nicolas Balacheff, Laboratoire d’informatique de Grenoble

Contributors: Jacqueline Bourdeau, Télé-université, Montréal (Québec)

Paul A. Kirschner, Centre for Learning Sciences and Technologies, Open University of the Netherlands

#### Definition
A cognitive tutor is an intelligent tutoring system which “possesses a computational model capable of solving the problems that are given to students in the ways students are expected to solve the problems" (Anderson et al. 1996 p.3)

#### Comments on the history
The expression "cognitive tutor" was coined in the context of the Advanced Computer Tutoring Project at Carnegie Mellon University in the mid1980’s. The objective was to design tutors based on "a cognitive model of the competence that the student is being asked to learn" (Anderson et al. p.3). The design of cognitive tutors inherited and is grounded in more than a decade of research on ACT* theory of an architecture of cognition (Anderson 1983). It left the approach based on models informed by human teaching, for models informed by a learning theory so that the environment is able to take actions that facilitate learning because it uses a cognitive model of where the student is in a task (ibid. p.47). Koedinger and Corbett (2006), later with Aleven (2010), experimented innovative methods to produce and evaluate the Cognitive tutors (Koedinger and Corbett p.62). They also provided a research platform for a series of projects on cognitive tutors. Since 2011, Cognitive Tutor™ is a trade mark owned by Carnegie Learning Inc. , the publisher of these tutors (Blessing, 2011).

#### Related terms
Intelligent tutoring system, intelligent tutor, tutoring system, model tracing, knowledge tracing, cognitive fidelity, learner model, cognitive science, Cognitive Tutor™

#### Disciplinary issues
The design of “cognitive tutors” is grounded on the three postulates of the ACT* theory: procedural-declarative distinction, knowledge compilation, strengthening with practice. It complies with the eight following principles (Anderson et al. 1996 pp.14 sqq): (1) represent student competence as a production set, (2) communicate the goal structure underlying the problem-solving, (3) provide instruction in the problem solving context, (4) promote an abstract understanding of the problem-solving knowledge, (5) minimize working memory load, (6) provide immediate feedback on errors, (7) adjust the grain size of instruction with learning, (8) facilitate successive approximations to the target skill. The design of cognitive tutors faces two major challenges (Aleven 2010 p.57): flexibility to adapt to students’ actual solutions, and cognitive fidelity to accurately correspond to the knowledge components students are actually learning. The naming of cognitive tutors too is problematic, since intelligent tutoring systems can be grounded in cognitive science and not be called cognitive tutors.

#### Key references
[1] Aleven V. (2010) Rule-based cognitive modeling for intelligent tutoring systems. In: Nkambou R., Bourdeau J., Mizoguchi R. (eds.) Advances in Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp.33-62). Berlin: Springer verlag.

[2] Anderson J. R. (1983) The Architecture of Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

[3] Anderson J. R., Corbett A. T., Koedinger K. R., Pelletier R. (1996) Cognitive Tutors: Lessons Learned. ARI Research Note 96-66. United States Army, Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences.

[4] Blessing, S. (2011) The Cognitive Tutor™: Successful Application of Cognitive Science.

[5] Koedinger K. & Corbett A. (2006), Cognitive Tutors, in Sawyer, L., Ed., The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 61-77) Cambridge University Press.

#### Collaboration script

Draft 1

Editor: Pierre Dillenbourg, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

Contributor: Frank Fischer, Department of Psychology, University of Munich

#### Definition
A collaboration script is a set of instructions designed for structuring collaborative learning.
Scripting collaborations is a pedagogical method which instead of leaving team members completely free, prescribes the organization of the task and the organization of the collaborative process. More specifically, collaboration scripts specify team composition, roles differentiation, activity steps and modes of communication.

#### Comments on the history
The word ‘script’ was inspired by Schank’s notion of script, developed in artificial intelligence: “a structure that describes appropriate sequences of events in a particular context. A script is made up of slots and requirements about what can fill those slots. The structure is an integrated whole, and what is in one slot affect what can be in another.” (Schank and Abelson 1977, p.41).
The notion of “collaboration script” emerged from the observation that collaborative learning is not always effective and that there is a need to design teamwork in such a way that productive interactions emerge such as explanations, argumentation and mutual regulation. This expression has been used to designate scaffolds structuring face-to-face collaboration (O’Donnell and Dansereau 1992) and computer supported collaboration (Dillenbourg 2002).

#### Related terms
Macro-script, micro-script, Internal collaboration script, external collaboration script, integrated script, overscripting, pedagogical scenario, lesson plan, classroom script. Computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL)

#### Disciplinary issues
Although it has been inspired by AI research, the term “script” as used in this definition does not relate to the term “script” used in programming (eg. ‘PERL script’).

The term “script” is used in cognitive psychology where it refers to “highly specific memory structures that remain relatively fixed in situation in which the script is activated” (Kollar et al. 2006). In AI as well, “a script is a predetermined, stereotyped sequence of actions that defines a well-known situation.” (Schank and Abelson 1975, p.41). In contrast, collaboration scripts can vary in the degrees of freedom they attribute to learners to structure their collaboration (Kollar et al. 2006).

A series of term have been coined to differentiate several characteristics or features of collaboration scripts:

* “Macro-script” prescribes collaboration in a coarse grain, i.e. as a sequence of activities. The best-known example is the JIGSAW script developed by Aronson et al. (1978).
* **“Micro-script”** prescribes the way learners interact with each other: for instance, if John proposes and argument, Suzanne should next proposes a counter-argument. Micro-scripts are somehow dialogue models – many of them argumentation models- that team members are expected to internalize through their practice.
* **“Integrated script”** refers to macro-scripts that not only include collaborative activities, but also individual activities (reading, summarizing …) as well as whole-class activities (lecturing, debriefing). With this extension, the concept gets very close to the general notion of pedagogical scenario, lesson plan or classroom script.
* **“Internal collaboration script”** refers to the knowledge an individual has about a recurring collaborative situations. Internal collaboration scripts are seen as guiding an individual’s understanding of and acting in these situations. Internal collaboration scripts may interact in complex ways with external collaboration scripts (i.e., instructional guidance for collaboration) (Kollar et al., 2006).
* **“Overscripting”** refers to the risk that a high level of script rigidity may spoil the natural richness of collaboration.

#### Key references
[1] Aronson E., Blaney N., Sikes J., Stephan C., Snapp M. (1978) The Jigsaw Classroom. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publication.
[2] Dillenbourg P. (2002) Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional design. In: Kirschner P. A. (ed.) Three worlds of CSCL. Can we support CSCL (pp.61-91). Heerlen: Open Universiteit.
[3] Dillenbourg P., Hong F. (2008) The mechanics of CSCL macro scripts. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. 3 (1) 5-23
[4] Fischer F., Mandl H., Haake J. M., Kollar I. (eds.) (2007) Scripting computer-supported collaborative learning – cognitive, computational, and educational perspectives. New York: Springer.
[5] Kollar I., Fischer F., Hesse F. W. (2006) Collaboration scripts - a conceptual analysis. Educational Psychology Review. 18(2) 159-185
[6]O'Donnell A. M., Dansereau D. F. (1992) Scripted cooperation in student dyads: A method for analyzing and enhancing academic learning and performance. In R. Hertz-Lazarowitz and N. Miller (eds.) Interaction in cooperative groups: The theoretical anatomy of group learning (pp. 120-141). London: Cambridge University Press.
[7] Schank R.C., Abelson R. (1977) Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding : An Inquiry into Human Knowledge Structures. Hillsdale, N.J. : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 256 pages.

### Constructionism

Draft 2

Editor: Richard Noss, London Knowledge Lab, IOE, University of London

#### Definition

Constructionism is a theory of learning and construction of meaning by engaging in the making of concrete and public entities, either material objects or tangible representations.

#### Comments on history

Seymour Papert launched the idea of constructionism in the mid-nineteen eighties. The central idea is that a powerful way for learners to build knowledge structures in their minds, is to build with external representations, to construct physical or virtual entities that can be shared. While the constructionist project is presented like a pedagogical theory (i.e. constructionism Vs instructionism in Papert and Harel terms, ibid.), it is as much a theory of epistemology as one of pedagogy, seeking to develop knowledge structures in the mind alongside physical or virtual structures external to the mind. Understanding the development of the structure of knowledge is part of and integral to the encouragement of an inclusive and powerful pedagogic theory and practice advocated by Papert.

#### Related terms
Constructivism

#### Disciplinary issues
Defining “constructionism” would be “oxymoronic” following the inventors of this neologism “ since, after all, constructionism boils down to demanding that everything be understood by being constructed.”

“The simplest definition of constructionism evokes the idea of learning-by-making” (Harel & Papert 1991 p.1)

“Constructionism – the N word as opposed to the V word – shares constructivism’s connotation of learning as “building knowledge structures” irrespective of the circumstances of the learning. It then adds the idea that this happens especially felicitously in a context where the learner is consciously engaged in constructing a public entity, whether it’s a sand castle on the beach or a theory of the universe” (Harel & Papert 1991 p.1).

Whereas the theoretical concept of constructivism, introduced by Piaget in the mid-twentieth century, captures the psychological substrate on which all learning (irrespective of teaching) is built, the idea of constructionism sought to develop a theory of pedagogy that could foster learning.

#### Key references
Harel I., Papert S. (eds.) (1991). Constructionism. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation [the first chapter is available here [http://www.papert.org/articles/SituatingConstructionism.html and http://namodemello.com.br/pdf/tendencias/situatingconstrutivism.pdf](http://www.papert.org/articles/SituatingConstructionism.html and http://namodemello.com.br/pdf/tendencias/situatingconstrutivism.pdf).

### Didactical engineering

Draft 1

Editor: Michèle Artigue, DIDIREM, Université Paris 7.

#### Definition
Didactical engineering is the design and experimentation of teaching sequences, adopting an internal mode of validation based on the comparison between a priori and a posteriori analysis within the framework of the theory of didactical situations. It includes four steps:

* (i) preliminary analyses investigating the epistemological, cognitive and institutional conditions and constraints;
* (ii)  design and a priori analysis with particular attention paid to the identification and choice of values for the didactic variables and anticipation of their potential effect on the “students-milieu” interaction;
* (iii)  experimentation;
* (iv)  a posteriori analysis and validation of the hypotheses underlying the design

#### Comments on the history
The term Didactical engineering was introduced in mathematics education by French researchers in the early eighties (e.g. Chevallard 1982) for denoting a specific form of didactical design inspired by the theory of didactical situations (Brousseau, 1997). Didactical engineering became then a privileged methodology of research within this community.

“Compared with other types of research based on class experiments, the methodology of didactical engineering is also characterized by the register in which it is placed and the methods of validation used. [...] (It situates) in a case study mode where validation is essentially internal, founded on the confrontation between a priori and a posteriori analysis” (Artigue, 1992, p. 44)

The term was progressively used in different scientific cultures and beyond the sole mathematics, for denoting both research and development designs presenting these characteristics. The links of such constructions with the theory of didactical situations are more or less strong, even if globally these designs tend to optimize the mathematical responsibility of students through adidactical interaction with an appropriate “milieu” (Warfield, 2006). Didactical engineering also extended to designs aiming at teacher education.

#### Related terms
Design research, Didactical design, Instructional design, Learning design

#### Translation issues
French: ingénierie Didactique
Spanish: ingeniería didáctica

#### Disciplinary issues
In TEL research, didactical engineering has played an essential role for identifying the learning and teaching affordances of technology in school settings as these could not be inferred from naturalistic observations. In such research, the way digital artifacts, considered as elements of the “milieu”, impact learning processes by creating new possibilities of action and interaction with the “milieu” and by changing their economy has been emphasized.

#### Key references
[1] Artigue M. (1992) Didactic engineering. In: Douady R., Mercier A. (eds.) Research in Didactique of Mathematics. Selected Papers, pp. 41-66. Grenoble : La Pensée Sauvage. (translation of : Artigue M. (1990) Ingénierie didactique. Recherches en Didactique des Mathématiques, vol. 9/3, 281-308).

[2] Artigue M. (2009). Didactical design in mathematics education. In, C. Winslow (ed.), Nordic Research in Mathematics Education. Proceedings from NORMA08 in Copenhaguen, April 21-April 25, 2008. pp. 7-16. Sense Publishers.

[3] Brousseau, G. (1997). Theory of didactical situations in mathematics. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

[4] Chevallard Y. (1982), Sur l’ingénierie didactique. Contribution à la préparation de la IIe Ecole d’Eté de Didactique des Mathématiques, Note de travail, IREM d’Aix-Marseille.

[5] Margolinas, C., Abboud-Blanchard, M., Bueno-Ravel, L., Douek, N., Fluckiger, A., Gibel, P., et al. (Eds.). (2011). En amont et en aval des ingénieries didactiques. Grenoble: La pensée sauvage.

[6] (Ruthven K., Laborde C., Leach J., Tiberghien A. 2009). Design Tools in Didactical Research: Instrumenting the Epistemological and Cognitive Aspects of the Design of Teaching Sequences, Educational Researcher, Vol. 38, No. 5, pp. 329–342.

[7] Warfield, V. M. (2006). Invitation to Didactique.

### E-assessment

Draft 1

Editor: Valerie Shute and Yoon Jeon Kim, Florida State University

#### Definition
e-assessment refers to assessment methods and practices that emphasize the role of information technology relative to measuring students’ learning.

#### Comments on the history
The use of computer technology in educational assessment has a decades-long history. Computers were initially adopted for assessment in the 1970s in order to reduce human raters’ scoring workload. Since then, assessment has progressed in conjunction with technological advancements. Computer-based assessment has become widespread in large-scale assessments, such as language testing and college entrance examinations, due to its convenience and accuracy. The terms “computer-adaptive testing” and “web-based assessment” are used interchangeably with “computer-based assessment”, but they are in fact two special cases of computer-based assessment. That is, computer-adaptive testing has a stronger emphasis on nonlinear item selection by rapidly estimating the examinee’s ability based on his/her previous responses. Web-based assessment refers to computer-based assessment that is typically delivered via online learning management systems.

Although advancements in computer-based assessment provide the technological foundation for e-assessment, the current focus in e-assessment is in exploring the possibilities of the increasingly popular rich digital media, such as web 2.0 tools and video games. In addition, mobile and tablet devices are providing new opportunities for e-assessment. For example, the introduction of personal response systems (also known as clickers) has greatly simplified formative assessment in large classroom environments. We should note that the primary focus of e-assessment is not developing new assessment tools but improving learning by using new assessment technologies. Thus, pedagogical benefits and pitfalls of e-assessment technologies need to be carefully considered. A widely circulated report by the Joint Information Systems Committee [JISC] (2007) similarly emphasizes that “e-assessment in fact is much more than just an alternative way of doing what we already do… Assessment is perhaps the best way of identifying the support needs of learners and can instill a desire to progress further if linked to appropriate resources, good quality, timely feedback, and to challenging but stimulating ways of demonstrating understanding and skills.”

#### Related terms
Computer-based assessment (CBA), computer-assisted assessment (CAA), computer-aided assessment (CAA), computer adaptive assessment (CAA), computer adaptive testing (CAT), online assessment, technology-enabled assessment, technology-enhanced assessment, technology-embedded assessments, technology-based assessment, Internet-based testing, web-based assessment

#### Disciplinary issues
Traditionally, e-assessment uses computer and information technology to make the assessment process more efficient by automating functions that would otherwise require human assessors. These functions include item construction and selection, assessment delivery, item analysis, interpretation, scoring, and score presentation (Baker & O'Neil, 1995). More recently, however, e-assessment refers to current efforts within the educational community to take advantage of technological advancements. These efforts are motivated by the need to go beyond “fill-in the bubble” tests and move forward to authentic assessments of complex skills and knowledge (Pellegrino, Chudowsky, & Glaser, 2001). The “e” in e-assessment involves making choices from a wide range of computer and information technologies that can be used as components of assessment development, implementation, and delivery. These choices should be aligned with the purpose and goal of the assessment. These choices should address the following considerations:

* Which platform is most suitable for the assessment (e.g., web-based, computer-based, simulation- and game-based)?
* Does the assessment need to be linear or adaptive (e.g., scoring rules, item selection algorithms)?
* How will the assessment materials be presented (e.g., static vs. interactive)?
* What is the format of the expected student response (e.g., clicking the right answer, multimedia input)?

The word “assessment” in e-assessment relates to the purpose and features of the assessment. In general, the purpose of assessment can be categorized as formative, diagnostic, or summative. In addition, e-assessment must maintain the features of traditional assessment such as validity, reliability, fairness, and accessibility (Baker, O'Neil, & Linn, 1993; Shute, 2009)

#### Key references
[1] Baker, E. L., O'Neil, H. F., & Linn, R. L. (1993). Policy and validity prospects for performance-based assessment. American Psychologist, 48(12), 1210-1218. doi: 10.1037/0003-066x.48.12.1210

[2] Baker, E. L., & O'Neil, H. F., Jr. (1995). Computer technology futures for the improvement of assessment. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 4(1), 37-45.

[3] Joint Information Systems Committee. (2007). Effective practice with e-assessment: an overview of technologies, policies and practice in further and higher education.

[4] Pellegrino, J., Chudowsky, N., & Glaser, R. (2001). Knowing what students know. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

[5] Shute, V. J. (2009). Simply assessment. International Journal of Learning, and Media, 1(2), 1-11.

### Educational affordance

Draft 3

Editor: Paul A. Kirschner, Centre for Learning Sciences and Technologies, Open University of the Netherlands

Contributor: Nicolas Balacheff, LIG, Grenoble, France

#### Definition

In the context of research in education and TEL research, the term "educational affordance" has acquired a meaning which relates to the search to express properties of an environment which in interaction with a user enhance the learning potential:
>"Educational affordances are those characteristics of an artifact (e.g. how a chosen educational paradigm is implemented) that determine if and how a particular learning behavior could possibly be enacted within a given context (e.g., project team, distributed learning community). Educational affordances can be defined [...] as the relationships between the properties of an educational intervention and the characteristics of the learner (for CSCL: learner and learning group) that enable particular kinds of learning by him/her (for CSCL: members of the group too)."
(Kirschner 2002, p.14)

#### Comments on the history
Coined by J.J. Gibson (1977), an affordance refers to the possibilities for actions between an actor and an artifact which would exist independently from the fact that it is perceived effectively. It is based upon a perception-action coupling (i.e., see-do) and a reciprocal relationship between an actor and an artifact (i.e., the actor is tired, thus she/he sits on a chair though the chair can be and is used for many other things depending on what the actor needs to and can do such as changing a light bulb). Note that the chair does not have an affordance but that the affordance is defined by the relationship between the person (and his/her state or intention) and the chair (and its characteristics).

Donald Norman (1988) and William Gaver (1991) have modified and/or expanded the term as a conceptual tool for discussing the design of interactive systems and respectively speak of perceived and perceptible affordances.

#### Related terms
adaptive learning environment, epistemic affordance, interaction, situated learning

#### Translation issues
French: disponibilité d'une ressource éducative, exploitabilité d'une situation éducative. Most often than not the term is directly imported (affordance)
German: affordanz

#### Disciplinary issues
This term was imported in computer science by Norman (1988) to refer to action possibilities perceived and perceptible by the user. Its use in the context of TEL research needed some adaptations:

>"The reader must not take the original meaning of affordance for an artifact as complicated as a CSCL environment literally. Affordances in Gibson's sense apply primarily to very simple artifacts where a direct ‘see-do coupling' exists. The actor doesn't consciously think, but rather perceives the affordance and acts, although the ability to perceive the affordance (discriminate patterns of information in order to be able to perceive something) may need to be learnt.
For complicated artifacts such as educational environments, learning must also be considered and is permitted. There is a perception-action coupling, but it is less direct. After a learning/habituation period, the actions become automatic and unconscious. Affordances in this sense don't cause, but merely allow. They lower the threshold for carrying out and/or permit an action."
(Kirschner, 2002 p.13)

#### References
[1] Gaver, W. (1991). Technology affordances. In: S. P. Robertson, G. M. Olson, & J. S. Olson (Eds.), Proceedings of the ACM CHI 91 Human Factors in Computing Systems Conference. April 28 - June 5, 1991 (pp. 79-84). New York: ACM.

[2]Gibson J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, Acting and Knowing (pp. 67-82). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

[3] Kirschner P. A. (2002). Can we support CCSL ? Educational, social and technological affordances for learning. In: Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support CSCL ? (pp. 7-34). The Open Universiteit Nederland.

[4] Norman D. A. (1988) The psychology of everyday things. New York: Basic Books. 257 pages.

### Educational data mining

Draft 1

Editor: Michel C. Desmarais, Polytechnique Montreal

Contributor: Ryan S.J.d. Baker, Worcester Polytechnic Institute

#### Definition
Educational Data Mining is a term used for processes designed for the analysis of data from educational settings to better understand students and the settings which they learn in.

#### Comments on the history
The term emerged from a series of workshops organized around the theme of analysing student log data, the first of which can be traced back to the ITS 2000 Conference in Montreal. In 2005, the first workshop bearing the name “Educational Data Mining” (EDM) was held in Pittsburgh along with the AAAI Conference (Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence). EDM is now the name of an international conference held annually since 2008. In addition, a related conference on Learning analytics (LAK2011) appeared in 2011. The first issue of the International Journal of EDM, an on-line and open-access publication hosted at www.educationaldatamining.org/JEDM, was published in 2009. In 2011, the International Educational Data Mining Society was founded to organize the conference and journal.

#### Related terms
Learning analytics, usage analysis, learner data, student log data, knowledge discovery, data mining, statistical learning, data mining, psychometrics, student modeling, classification, regression, clustering, factor analysis, association rule mining, visualization, discovery with models, database.

#### Translation issues
French: "analytique des données éducationnelles"

#### Disciplinary issues
The field of Educational Data Mining (EDM) draws methods and theory from a number of disciplines, such as data mining, knowledge discovery, psychometrics, and statistical learning. It aims to contribute models and findings that can help design and implement innovative learning applications and environments, as well as contributing to theory in educational psychology and other areas of education. EDM methods include (but are not limited to) classification, regression, factor analysis, clustering, relationship mining, knowledge prediction, correlation mining, association rule mining, visualization, domain structure discovery, discovery with models.

#### Key references
[1] Baker R., Yacef K. (2009) The state of educational data mining in 2009: A review and future visions. Journal of Educational Data Mining. 1, 3-17.

[2] Baker R.S.J.d. (2010) Data Mining For Education. In: Peterson P., Baker R., Mcgaw B. (eds.) International Encyclopedia of Education (3rd edition) (7, 112-118). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
[3] Romero C., Ventura, S. (2007) Educational Data Mining: A Survey from 1995 to 2005. Expert Systems with Applications. 33, 125-146.

[4] Romero C., Ventura S. (2010) Educational Data Mining: A Review of the State-of-the-Art. IEEE Transaction on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C: Applications and Reviews, 6, 601 - 618.

[5] Koedinger K.R., Cunningham K. A. S., Leber B. (2008) An open repository and analysis tools for fine-grained, longitudinal learner data. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Educational Data Mining, 157-166.

[6] EDM, International Working Group on Educational Data Mining: Educational data mining. (2009)

### Embedded phenomena

Draft 1

Editor: Tom Moher, University of Illinois at Chicago

#### Definition

Coined by Moher (2006), the term embedded phenomena refers to a design framework that situates classroom learners within the spatial and temporal bounds of imaginary scientific phenomena for the purpose of collaborative inquiry. The framework is characterized by four common features.

> "- Simulated dynamic phenomena are "mapped" onto the physical space of the classroom.
- The state of the simulation is represented and manipulated through distributed (stationary or mobile) media located around the classroom representing "portals" into a phenomenon, depicting local state information corresponding to the mapping between the phenomenon and the room.
-The simulation, represented via the portals, runs concurrently with, but independent of, the flow of regular instructional activity in the classroom. Typically, simulations run over time courses on the order of several weeks.
- Students monitor and manipulate of the state of the simulation through the portals, collaboratively gathering, aggregating, and analyzing evidence to solve a problem or answer a driving question."
(Moher 2006 p.691)

#### Translation issues
French: phénomènes embarqués
German: eingebettet Phänomene

#### Disciplinary issues
The term "embedded" is frequently used in computer science to refer to technologies implanted within physical environments or artifacts.

#### Key references
Moher, T. [1] (2006). Embedded Phenomena: Supporting Science Learning with Classroom-sized Distributed Simulations. Proceedings ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2006) (April 2006, Montreal, Canada), 691-700.

#### Related terms
Situated learning, Embodied learning, Augmented reality, Mixed reality

#### Related documents
[Moher T., 2006, Embedded Phenomena: Supporting Science Learning with Classroom-sized Distributed Simulations [2]](http://www.evl.uic.edu/moher/pubs/MoherCHI2006.pdf)

### Epistemic affordance

Draft 1

Editor: Manolis Mavrikis, Institute of Education, London Knowledge Lab

#### Definition
The expression "epistemic affordances" refers to those affordances that are related to the expected or potential ways that a particular computational environment can be used to support learning by facilitating, or constraining on purpose, the acquisition of new information or knowledge.

#### Related terms
Affordance, cognitive affordance, educational affordance

#### Disciplinary issues
The term "epistemic affordances" is used in philosophy of perception extending Gibson's notion of affordance "to include epistemic actions of co-classification and the like" thus enabling the thesis that "perceptual states offer information about affordances, including—crucially—epistemic affordances" (Matthen 2005 p.23). In particular according to Matthen similar to the way that "awareness of objects amounts to sensing the availability of these objects for attempts at physical interaction" (op. cit. p.9), "sensory awareness of object-features amounts to awareness of ‘epistemic affordances’, or awareness that certain epistemic operations are appropriate" (ibid.). This is close to the interpretation that can be given to the term when used to refer to ‘epistemic affordances’ of a computational environment.

The term is also used by Sloman (2008) in the area of AI to refer to "the possibilities and constraints on information acquisition" of ‘intelligent agents’ which need to work out what kind of information is relevant to process ("e.g. what can be perceived, felt, heard, etc. allowing the individual to obtain new information").

The introduction of the expression "epistemic affordance", in TEL research, allows making the distinction and differentiating from the perceived ‘pragmatic’ or ‘interaction’ affordances of educational software (and particularly Norman’s sense of the term) which can be somewhat autonomous of any epistemic basic (Mavrikis et al., to appear).

#### References
Matthen, M. [1] (2005). Seeing, Doing, and Knowing: A Philosophical Theory of Sense Perception, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 384 pages.

Mavrikis, M., Noss, R., Hoyles, C. Geraniou E. [2] (2012). Sowing the seeds of algebraic generalisation: designing epistemic affordances for an intelligent microworld. In Noss, R. and DiSessa, A. (eds) Special Issue on Knowledge Transformation, Design and Technology, Journal of Computer Assisted Learning

Sloman, A. [3] (2007) Predicting Affordance Changes : steps towards knowledge-based visual servoing. Unpublished discussion paper.

### Epistemic feedback

Draft 1

Editor: Vanda Luengo, Laboratoire d’informatique de Grenoble

Contributors: Nicolas Balacheff, Laboratoire d’informatique de Grenoble

#### Definition
Epistemic feedback is a feedback provided by a learning environment specific to the piece of knowledge at stake and its learning characteristics. The computation of an epistemic feedback involves data from the learner, the pedagogical models, and the knowledge domain.

#### Comments on the history
The origin of the expression “epistemic feedback” can be traced in the philosophy of science (Margeneau 1978 p.287) where it denotes the feedback whose meaning requires interactions between tangible characteristics of the environment and users' knowledge or expectations. It is used in HCI research which takes into account three functional roles of human gestures: semiotic, ergotic and epistemic; the latter referring to the epistemic function of gesture which “allows humans to learn from the environment through tactile experience.” (Crowley and Martin 1997 p.1). The concept of epistemic feedback was introduced in TEL research, in the context of the design and study of virtual reality and simulation for professional training, to characterize feedback which allow learner to perceive and analyze his or her action in relation to the knowledge at stake (Luengo 2009 p.26 sqq).

#### Related terms
epistemic interaction, epistemic activities, epistemic affordance

#### Disciplinary issues
Stellan Ohlsson (1996) coined the term epistemic activities, to account the fact that “human beings employ their understanding, not in action, but in the generation of symbols” (ibid.p.95). He included activities such as describing, explaining, predicting, arguing, etc. In line with this approach, CSCL research adopted the term epistemic interaction for those interactions which are “potentially concerned with the expression and critical examination of foundations for proposals” (Baker et al. 2001).

The development of high quality simulations and their use for learning opens a new possibility to support the acquisition of tacit knowledge, which as well is potentially concerned by a critical examination of foundations for action. Epistemic interactions related to tacit knowledge, often ill-defined (Lynch et all. 2009), in the context of the use of simulation, aim at taking into account epistemic activities, especially controls during the action, in generating an epistemic feedback. For example, in the case of visual and haptic perceptions, the identification of the visual controls and their rational (what knowledge is mobilized to allow this visual verification) makes possible generating an epistemic feedback linked to the associated knowledge. For this kind of interaction it is not necessary to propose a complete description of the action—what is actually impossible in ill-defined domains—but to identify the relevant controls of the actions from a learning perspective.

#### Key references
[1] Margenau H. (1978) Physics and philosophy: selected essays. D. Reidel Co.

[2] Baker, M.J., de Vries, E., Lund, K., Quignard, M. (2001) Computer-mediated epistemic interactions for co-constructing scientific notions: Lessons learned from a five-year research programme. In: Dillenbourg P., Eurelings A., Hakkarainen K. (eds.) Proceedings of EuroCSCL 2001: European Perspectives on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 89-96). Maastricht: Maastricht McLuhan Institute.

[3] Crowley J. L., Martin J. (1997) Visual Processes for Tracking and Recognition of Hand Gestures. International Workshop on Perceptual User Interfaces, Banf, Ca, October 1997

[4] Luengo V. (2009) Les rétroactions épistémiques dans les Environnements Informatiques pour l’Apprentissage Humain. Habilitation à diriger de recherche. Grenoble: Université Joseph Fourier.

[5] Ohlsson, S. (1996) Learning to do and learning to understand: A lesson and a challenge for cognitive modeling, in P. Reiman et H. Spade (dirs.), Learning in Humans and Machines: Towards an interdisciplinary learning science, Oxford, Elsevier Science, p. 37-62.

[6] Lynch, C., Ashley, K., Pinkwart, N., Aleven, V. (2009) Concepts, structures, and goals: Redefining ill-definedness. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education.

### Experimential Learning

Draft 1

Editors: Vyara Dimitrova and Paul A. Kirschner, Centre for Learning Sciences and Technologies, Open University of the Netherlands

#### Definition

1. Experiential learning is the learning and “education that occurs as a direct [result of] participation in the events of life” (Houle 1980, p. 221).
2. Experiential learning is “ [the] direct encounter with the phenomena being studied rather than merely thinking about the encounter, or only considering the possibility of doing something about it” (Borzak 1981, p. 9, quoted in Brookfield 1983).

#### Comments on the history

Although the beginnings of the term may be marked a lot earlier, its popular introduction arguably took place with Kolb’s (1984) publication on experiential learning theory (ELT). His main argument is that unlike most theories of human learning, “Experiential Learning Theory (ELT) provides a holistic model of the learning process and a multilinear model of adult development, both of which are consistent with what we know about how people learn, grow, and develop” (Kolb, Boyatzis, & Mainemelis 2000, p. 2). The theory bears the name ‘experiential’ to underscore its “intellectual” origins as well as the essential role of experience in adult learning (Kolb 1984, p. 20). An adult individual, thus, accumulates knowledge through the cyclical process of going through an experience, which serves as substance for reflection. Reflecting on experiences generates abstract concepts whereas these abstractions, in their own right, engender outputs for actions. The end of the cycle, before a new one commences, amounts to active experimentation with these very outputs. Thus, in Kolb’s terms, the kernel of experiential learning lies in “the process whereby knowledge is created through transformation of experience” (p. 41). Ever since the 1984 publication, the rationale behind ELT has been used as the basis of multiple methodologies and design practices among which experience-based learning, gaming, computer-based simulations, narratology, etc., as well as in various learning and educational contexts including formal and informal, business and academic, organizational and individual (for an overview see Silberman, 2007).

#### Related terms
Informal learning, experience-based learning, constructivism, constructionism, learning by doing, empirical inductivism, inquiry learning, learning by discovery

#### Disciplinary issues
Depending on the context, both definitions suggested above can be equally applicable to research into (technology enhanced) learning. The latter definition, more specific to educational practitioners’ point of view, implies that experience is utilized as an instrument in planned and probably structured activities aiming at achieving the educational goal of direct application of knowledge, skills and attitudes in relevant to this very knowledge, skills and attitudes settings.

These two definitions should not be considered exclusive since they both represent different forms of identical underlying learning mechanisms. In this respect, most experiential learning follows what Ohlsson (2011) calls ‘empirical inductivism’ which is when a person first extrapolates regularities from past experiences storing them in their episodic memory and then consequently applies these stored regularities to future situations. Learning from experiences may also occasionally result in construction of knowledge that qualitatively surpasses the already formed structures, a process which has been described as the so-called learning paradox (Bereiter, 1985)

In spite of its popularity and its merit of drawing the public’s attention to learning from real life experiences, Kolb’s ELT and its related methodological implications have undergone much criticism from different perspectives. Although numerous, the most serious criticism might concern the theoretical claims of its capability to represent a wholesale theory of how adult learning comes about. These claims, however, can hardly be sustained without considering a likewise wholesale scientifically testable and tested model of knowledge structure organization (i.e., cognitive architecture). Lacking it, ELT does not present a viable way of validating its educational design applications (Kirschner, Sweller, & Clark, 2006).

More recently, attempts have been made at grounding learning through experience in a broader and also theory verifiable perspective, especially in terms of looking into one’s declarative knowledge acquisition. Yet, unlike our relatively rich understanding of how procedural knowledge is acquired, very little is known about the conditions under which an individual or a group of individuals can construct declarative knowledge which overrides, in Ohlsson’s (2011) words, the basis upon which it has been created (i.e., one’s experiences). To date, phenomena causing the learning paradox have remained by and large a subject of speculations (Chi & Ohlsson, 2005). Given the complexity of human learning in real-life conditions which encompasses not only knowledge and skills but also attitudes (Kirschner & Merriënboer, 2008), the incorporation of self-regulation mechanisms in the whole account might provide more directions to understanding the yet missing pieces.

#### Key references
[1] Berieter, C. (1985). Toward a solution of the learning paradox. Review of Educational Research, 55(2), 201-226

[2] Borzak, L. (ed.) (1981). Field Study.A source book for experiential learning. Beverley Hills: Sage Publications

[3] Brookfield, S. D. (1983). Adult Learners, Adult Education and the Community. Milton Keynes, Open University Press

[4] Chi, M.T. H., & Ohlsson, S. (2005). Complex declarative learning. In K. J. Holyoak, & R. G. Morrison, The Cambridge Handbook of thinking and reasoning (pp. 371-399). New York: Cambridge University Press

[5] Houle, C. (1980) Continuing Learning in the Professions, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass

[6] Kirschner, P.A., & Merriënboer, J.J.G. (2008). Ten steps to complex learning: A new approach to instruction and instructional design. In T.L. Good (Ed.), 21st century education: A reference handbook (Vol. 1 &2, pp. 244-253). Thousand Oaks: Sage

[7] Kirschner, P.A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work: An analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential and inquiry-based teaching. Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75-86

[8] Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall

[9] Kolb, D., Boyatzis, R. E., & Mainemelis, C., (2000). Experiential learning theory: Previous research and new directions. (on-line accessed 14.02.2013)

[10] Ohlsson, S. (2011). Deep learning: How the mind overrides experience. New York: Cambridge University Press

[11] Silberman, M. (2007). The handbook of experiential learning. San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons.

### Game-based learning

Draft 1

Editors: Rosa Maria Bottino and Michela Ott, ITD-CNR, Genoa

#### Definition
"Game-based learning" refers to teaching-learning actions carried out in formal and/or informal educational settings by adopting games. It encompasses the use of both games designed expressly for fulfilling learning objectives (educational games) and "mainstream games" -- i.e. those games that are developed for fun when used to pursue learning objectives (Kirriemuir and McFarlane, 2004 p.19).

A characterization of the term from a design perspective is:

> "1. Having learning driven by personally meaningful scenarios;
2. Constructing problems to extend previous understandings and shape future ones;
3. Paying close attention to users' pre-existing beliefs;
4. Carefully designing for what the user experiences from moment to moment; and
5. Situating facts and knowledge in the context of doing."
::(Squire 2005 p.26)

#### Translation issues
Italiano: giochi educativi

German: lernspiel

French: apprentissage par le jeu

#### Disciplinary issues
The term has a very long tradition in theory and practice of pedagogy and psychology, although in its original meaning it was not expressly related to computer games (Martens et al, 2008). It has evolved towards a synonym of "Digital game-based learning", that is it refers to the use of digital games for learning purposes (Pivec, 2007; Prensky, 2001).

"Game-based learning environment" has a tight relation with the concept of "Serious games". Following some researchers the former is considered as a sub-category of the latter, following others they are considered synonymous. Considering them synonymous is correlative to a broad definition of learning as "any form of change in a person brought about by external measures such as (educational) games" (Breuer and Bente 2010, p.8)

#### Key references
Breuer J., Bente G. [1] (2010). Why so serious? On the relation of serious games and learning. Eludamos, Journal of Computer Game Culture, 4 (1) 7-24.

Kirriemuir J., McFarlane A. [2] (2004). Literature Review in Games and Learning Report 8 : Futurelab Series. 39 pages.

Klopfer et al [3](2009) "Moving learning games forward", Education Arcade paper (research report. 58 pages.

Moreno-Ger, P. et al., [4] (2008) Educational game design for online education, Computers in Human Behavior, doi:10.1016/j.chb.2008.03.012

Pivec M., [5] (2007) Editorial: Play and learn: potentials of game-based learning; British Journal of Educational Technology Vol 38 No 3 pp. 387-393] (http://www.marcprensky.com/writing/Prensky%20-%20Ch1-Digital%20Game-Based%20Learning.pdf)

[Prensky, M. [6] (2001). Digital game based learning. New York: McGraw-Hill. 442 pages.

Squire K., [7] (2005) Game-Based Learning: Present and Future State of the Field, coll. «An x-Learn Perspective Paper».

#### Related terms
Digital game-based learning, Edutainment, Epistemic games, Game-based learning environment, Serious games

#### Related documents
Mcfarlane et al. [8] (2002) Report on the educational use of games. A TEEM report.
Prensky M. [9] (2001) The digital game-based learning revolution - Chapter 1

### Informal learning

draft 2

Editors: Vyara Dimitrova and Paul A. Kirschner, Centre for Learning Sciences and Technologies, Open University of the Netherlands

#### Definition
Informal learning is any learning which is conscious or unconscious, intentional or non-intentional which takes place without an externally imposed curriculum or specific intended outcome.

#### Comments on the history
The term "informal learning" first appeared in Knowels’ (1950) book Informal adult education, but it was not until the 1990s when, based on a number of exploratory and descriptive studies, Marsick and Watkins (1990) succeeded in delivering a structured definition of the concept. They defined informal learning as:

> "[…] a category that includes incidental learning, [it] may occur in institutions, but is not typically classroom-based or highly structured, and control of learning rests primarily in the hands of the learner. Incidental learning is defined as a by-product of some other activity, such as task accomplishment , interpersonal interaction, sensing the organizational culture, trial-and-error experimentation, or even formal learning." (p.12)

Nevertheless, most of the term’s history is marked by discussions on its precise meaning, and consequently, users of the term informal learning have not yet agreed upon a unified definition. This underscores the challenges accompanying efforts for clear-cut discrimination between formal, non-formal and informal learning on the one hand, and different types of learning within informal learning itself (e.g., incidental learning, social learning, workplace learning, etc.). The debate goesso far as raising voices against the validity of the concept as being an all too general categorization of any type of learning which is not formal (Eraut, 2000). This account, however, once again demonstrates the necessity for understanding informal learning as a hyper-category of learning which allows for diverse modalities varying per learning situation.

#### Related terms
Formal learning, non-formal learning, self-directed learning, experiential learning, workplace learning, learning organization

#### Disciplinary issues
The term has been broadly accepted in the field of Human Resources Development (HRD henceforth) and adult learning. According to Garrick (1998), informal learning as concept in HRD represents a wholesale theory of workplace learning and assumes
> "[…] effects of workplace practices on one’s learning […] there are indeed rich sources of learning in day-to-day practice situations and that what is learned from experience is dynamic and open to multiple configurations." (p.1)

It is a matter of fact that workplace learning is often seen as a form of informal learning. In the area of teaching, for example, informal learning traditionally refers to the professional learning resulting from activities which teachers undertake at work (Lohman, 2006). Studies into learning to teach demonstrate that a great deal of teacher learning comes about through execution of everyday work activities or actions related to them, suggesting that most informal learning is an unintentional and unconscious by-product since it is embedded in these very activities/actions (e.g., Kwakman, 2003). This fact prompts some researchers to base the concept on that learning which emerges from not-learning-intended activities generalizing it to all everyday situations (van Merrienboer et al. 2009).

Nevertheless, a complete account of informal learning should also deal with those occasions, however rare, in which expert learners based on their highly developed domain knowledge and skills exhibit sufficient self-regulation and metacognitive skills to determine themselves the how, what and why of their learning process (e.g., Glaser, 1985), since the fundamental condition of no present external curricula is fully satisfied here. Therefore, an exhaustive informal learning definition should reasonably include unconscious and unplanned instances of learning as well as instances in which learners alone are actively in control of their own learning.

#### Key references
[1] Eraut, M. (2000). Non-formal learning and tacit knowledge in professional work. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 70(1), 113-136.

[2] Garrick, J. (1998). Informal learning in the workplace: Unmasking human resources development. City: NY: Routledge.

[3] Glaser, R. (1985). Thoughts on expertise. (Techincal report No. 8). Learning Research and Development Center. Pittsburgh, PA.

[4] Kwakman, K. (2003). Factors affecting teachers’ participation in professional learning activities. Teaching and teacher education. 19(2), 149-170.

[5] Lohman, M. C. (2006). Factors influencing teachers’ engagement in informal learning activities. Journal of workplace learning, 18(3), 141-156.

[6] Marsick, V. J. & Watkins, K. E. (1990). Informal and incidental learning in the workplace. City: NY: Routledge.

[7] Van Merriënboer, J. J. G., Kirschner, P. A., Paas, F., Sloep, P. B., & Caniëls, M. C. J. (2009). Towards an integrated approach for research on lifelong learning. Educational Technology Magazine, 49(3), 3-15.

### Inquiry learning

Draft 1

Editor: Ton de Jong, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands

Contributors: Danish Nadeem, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, Ard Lazonder, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands

#### Definition

Inquiry learning refers to an educational approach that capitalizes on students' "natural tendency of curiosity". In the science education literature, the term "inquiry" is broadly defined as a learning process that requires learners to learn in a way a scientist would acquire knowledge through research (Krajcik et.al., 1998; de Jong & van Joolingen, 1998; Sandoval, 2005; White & Frederiksen, 1998; Zimmerman 2007). A general definition for inquiry learning is given by National Science Foundation (2000, p. 2):

> "An approach to learning that involves a process of exploring the natural or material world, and that leads to asking questions, making discoveries, and rigorously testing those discoveries in the search for new understanding"

Specifically, as described by de Jong (2006a), the inquiry process involves: orientation (identification of variables and relations), hypothesis generation, experimentation (changing variable values, making predictions, and interpreting the outcomes), reaching conclusions (hypothesis testing), evaluation (reflection on the learning process and the acquired knowledge), planning and maintaining an overview of the inquiry effectively used to support inquiry process (monitoring)

Researchers also define the related term "inquiry-based learning" in the context of science education to mean inquiry learning. Banchi and Bell (2008) identified four different levels in inquiry-based learning, namely:

* (i) Confirmation inquiry
* (ii) Structured inquiry
* (iii) Guided inquiry
* (iv) Open inquiry.

These levels are based on inquiry progressions. The idea is to slowly let the students explore on their own as the inquiry level progresses (i.e., each inquiry level hinges upon the next level). For instance, conformation inquiry requires from students to confirm an already known scientific principle. They are given the questions and are provided with the methods to derive a solution. They learn already known scientific principles by doing investigations and by collecting and analysing data. In structured inquiry, students are provided with questions and a method; however, they are encouraged to give explanations with supporting evidence. In guided inquiry, only a question is given to the students and they are asked to design methods to test this question and explain the obtained results. Finally in open inquiry, students are better prepared to take their own initiative in doing science; they define their own research question, perform investigations, and derive conclusions, thus applying all the processes of inquiry cycle. Within all of these phases, students should also be supported by so-called "scaffolds", software instruments that help them to perform cognitive actions correctly. An example could be a software tool that helps students to state hypotheses. Overviews of such scaffolds can be found in Chang, Chen, Lin, & Sung (2008), de Jong (2006b, 2010), Quintana et al (2004).

The understanding of scientific method and developing scientific skills has already been encouraged by earlier research (Dewey 1938) and the benefits of inquiry learning to gain authentic experience in knowledge construction process has also been advocated (Bruner 1961). Researchers argue that inquiry learning should be central to science education instruction (Banchi & Bell, 2008; Sandoval, 2005; Schwab, 1962) because of its potential to stimulate thinking, acquiring deep knowledge, understanding the science concepts and learning the process of doing science. Recent studies and meta-analysis now prove the effectiveness of inquiry learning as compared to a number of other educational approaches. (Alfieri, Brooks, Aldrich, & Tenenbaum, in press; Eysink et al., 2009).

#### Key references
[1] Banchi, H. & Bell, R. (2008). The many levels of inquiry. Science and Children, 46, 26-29

[2] Bruner, J. S. (1961). The act of discovery. Harvard Educational Review, 31, 21-32.

[3] Chang, K. E., Chen, Y. L., Lin, H. Y., & Sung, Y. T. (2008). Effects of learning support in simulation-based physics learning. Computers & Education, 51, 1486-1498. doi: 10.1016/j.compedu.2008.01.007

[[4] Dewey, J. (1938). Experience and education. MacMillan, New York.](http://books.google.fr/books?id=UE2EusaU53IC&lpg=PP1&hl=fr&pg=PP1#v=onepage&q&f=false)

[[5] Krajcik, J., Blumenfeld, P. C., Marx, R. W., Bass, K. M., Fredricks, J., Soloway, E. (1998). Inquiry in project-based science classrooms: Initial attempts by middle school students. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7(3/4), 313- 350](http://stem.gstboces.org/Shared%20Documents/STEM%20DEPLOYMENT%20PROJECT%20RESEARCH/InquiryinProject-BasedScience.pdf)

[[6] National Science Foundation. (2000). Inquiry : Thoughts, Views, and Strategies for the K-5 Classroom. In Foundations, 2, 120 pages.](http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2000/nsf99148/pdf/nsf99148.pdf)

[[7] de Jong, T. (2006a). Scaffolds for computer simulation based scientific discovery learning. In J. Elen & R. E. Clark (Eds.), Handling complexity in learning environments (pp. 107-128). London: Elsevier Science Publishers.](http://www.compassproject.net/sadhana/teaching/readings/13808831.pdf)

[[8] de Jong, T. (2006b). Computer simulations - Technological advances in inquiry learning. Science, 312, 532-533](http://users.edte.utwente.nl/jong/JongScience2006.pdf)

[9] de Jong, T. (2010). Instruction based on computer simulations. In R. E. Mayer & P. A. Alexander (Eds.), Handbook of research on learning and instruction (pp. 446-466): Routledge Press.

[10] de Jong, T., & van Joolingen, W.R. (1998). Scientific discovery learning with computer simulations of conceptual domains. Review of Educational Research, 68, 179-201.

[11] Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., et al. (2004). A scaffolding design framework for software to support science inquiry. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13, 337-387.
[hhttp://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sce.20065/pdf] Sandoval, W. A. (2005). Understanding students' practical epistemologies and their influence on learning through inquiry. Science Education, 89, 634-656.

[12] Schwab, J.J. (1962). The teaching of science as enquiry. In J.J. Schwab and P.F. Brandwein (Eds.), The teaching of science (pp. 3-103). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

[13] White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making science accessible to all students. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 3 - 118.

[[14] Zimmerman, C. (2007). The development of scientific thinking skills in elementary and middle school. Developmental Review, 27, 172-223.](http://www.cogsci.ucsd.edu/~deak/classes/EDS115/ZimmermanSciThinkDR07.pdf)

#### Related terms
Inquiry-based learning, scientific discovery learning

#### Related documents
[Heather Banchi and Randy Bell, 2008 [15] Inquiry comes in various forms](http://learningcenter.nsta.org/files/sc0810_26.pdf)

[16]The Inquiry Process

[Inquiry Thoughts, Views, and Strategies for the K–5 Classroom. Foundations, Vol. 2 [17]](http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2000/nsf99148/pdf/nsf99148.pdf)

### Intelligent tutoring system

Draft 1
Editor: Jacqueline Bourdeau, Télé-université, Montréal; Monique Grandbastien, Université Henri-Poincaré, Nancy

#### Definition

An Intelligent tutoring system (ITS) is an AI-based system that can reason upon models of knowledge useful for fostering and evaluating learning. The main function of an ITS is to adapt to the learner through an understanding or an awareness of her cognitive, meta-cognitive or affective states

#### Comments on the history

The term “intelligent tutoring systems” was coined by David Sleeman and John Seely Brown (Sleeman and Brown 1982 p.1), acknowledging the evolution of Computer Assisted Instruction (CAI) into Intelligent Computer Assisted Instruction (ICAI), and emphasizing the focus on individual learning. In 1987, Wenger provided a detailed description of ITS in his seminal book entitled “Artificial Intelligence and Tutoring Systems”. In 1988 started the series of biannual ITS conferences. Most results from ITS research are to be found in the *International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Education*.

#### Related terms
Student modeling; Student model; Learner modeling; Learner model; learner module; Knowledge representation; Knowledge model; Knowledge module; Pedagogical module; Educational data mining; Artificial Intelligence in Education.

#### Translation issues
French: système tutoriel intelligent; tuteur intelligent.

#### Disciplinary issues
The field of ITS is by nature interdisciplinary, at the crossroads of computer science (artificial intelligence, software engineering, data mining, HCI) and educational psychology, cognitive science and instructional science. ITS research challenges these fields both at the fundamental and the methodological levels, and stimulates interdisciplinary thinking. From its origin, it represents an important milestone in the structuration of research on AI and Learning. Characteristics of ITS research is the emphasis on individualization and the requirement for the system to have its own problem solving expertise, as well as specific tutoring to conduct its interaction with the student: “Computer-assisted instruction evolves toward intelligent tutoring systems (ITSs) by passing three tests on intelligence. First, the subject matter, or domain, must be “known” to the computer system well enough for this embedded expert to draw inferences or solve problems in the domain. Second, the system must be able to deduce learners’ approximation of that knowledge. Third the tutorial strategy or pedagogy must be intelligent in that the “instructor in the box” can implement strategies to reduce the difference between expert and student performance.” (Burns and Capps, p.1). This is translated into the classical three modules architecture of ITSs: the domain module, the tutor module and the learner module. Following John Self (1999, p.350), basic architecture of ITSs was already established in the mid-seventies. However, “beside this classic component view of ITSs, these systems offer a number of services. The implementation of some of these services usually transcends the individual components”, all of these aiming at fine-tuned adaptation to the learner (Nkambou et al. 2010, p.5).

#### Key references
[1] Burns H.& Capps C. (1988) Foundation of intelligent tutoring systems: an introduction. In: Polson M. C., Richardson J. J. (eds.), Foundations of Intelligent tutoring systems (pp.1-19).Hillsdale, NJ: Laurence Erlbaum.

[2] Nkambou R., Bourdeau J., Mizoguchi R. (eds.) (2010). Advances in Intelligent tutoring systems. Springer Verlag.

[[3] Self J. (1999) The defining characteristics of intelligent tutoring systems research: ITSs care, precisely. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 10, 350-364](http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/19/73/46/PDF/self99.pdf)

[4] Sleeman D., Brown J. S. (eds) (1982) Intelligent tutoring systems. London: Academic Press.

[5] Wenger E. (1987) Artificial Intelligence and Tutoring Systems. Los Altos, CA: Kaufman Publishers.

[6] Woolf B. (2009) Building Intelligent Interactive Tutors: Student-centered Strategies for Revolutionizing E-learning. Burlington, MA, Morgan Kaufmann.

### Learning design

draft 1

Editor: Nicolas Balacheff, Laboratoire d’informatique de Grenoble

Contributors: Anne Lejeune, Laboratoire d’informatique de Grenoble

#### Definition

(1) Learning design is the application of learning design knowledge when developing a concrete unit of learning (a course, a lesson, a curriculum).

(2) Learning Design (LD) is a formal specification of learning design, providing a conceptual model for the description of teaching and learning processes. This specification consists of three different items: an information model, a best practice and implementation guide, and an XML binding with a binding document (Kopper and Tattersall 2005).

#### Comments on the history
The Learning Design (LD) formal specification has been conceived, based on the former Educational Modelling Language (EML), as a response to the need for effective and attractive courses and programs for learners, while at the same time providing a pleasant and effective work environment to those who have the task of developing course materials, planning the learning processes, providing tutoring and assessing performance (Kopper and Tattersall 2005, p.v). The idea of LD originated within the Valkenburg Group in 2002, and was adopted by the IMS consortium in 2003.

#### Related terms
Synonymous: instructional design, instructional system design

Other related terms: educational modelling language (EML), learning design knowledge

#### Disciplinary issues
The challenge of the IMS LD formal specification is to ensure a reasonable balance between flexibility and complexity when adapting to the constantly evolving advances of technology enhanced learning research; this especially applies to the increased interest in CSCL and adaptive learning. Beyond its pedagogical objective, IMS LD has the objective of making effective the sharing and reuse of learning design and ensuring interoperability.

#### Key references
[1] Koper R., Tattersall C. (eds) (2005) Learning design. Berlin: Springer.(Préface|[2])

### Learning Grid

Draft 2

Editors: Saverio Salerno and Pierluigi Ritrovato CRMPA – Research Center in Pure and Applied Mathematics University of Salerno

Contributor: Matteo Gaeta CRMPA – University of Salerno

#### Definition
A Learning Grid is an enabling software architecture based on three pillars: (i) grid technologies, (ii) semantics and (iii) educational Modelling allowing the definition and execution of new kinds of social-collaborative learning experiences obtained as a composition of distributed heterogeneous actors, resources and services, discovered and orchestrated through the Grid.

#### Comments on the history
The Grid technology was first defined in the late 90s by Ian Foster and Carl Kesselman, in the famous book “The Grid: Blueprint for a New Computing Infrastructure” (Foster and Kesselman 1999) as “a hardware and software infrastructure that provides dependable, consistent, pervasive, and inexpensive access to high-end computational capabilities”. The idea was to allow computing to have the same access facilities as those available for the power grid: just plug the cable in the wall and got the services. Further research (Foster et al. 2001, 2002) brought to a new vision of Grid that became synonym of infrastructure to “coordinate resource sharing and problem solving in dynamic, multi-institutional virtual organizations” where the focus is on the concept of Virtual Organization (VO). Starting from this wider vision, where the strict connection with high-end computing has been loosened, the term Learning Grid has got its new definition. The first discussion on the use of Grid technologies for enabling new forms of Learning was held by the Working Group on “eLearning Futures and the Learning GRID” established in the frame of EU-US cooperation in Science and Technology, in the 2001 e-Learning agreement. These research activities first led to the FP5 thematic network LeGE-WG (Learning Grid of Excellence – Working Group) in 2002 and later to a Working Group in the FP6 Network of Excellence Kaleidoscope (Salerno et al. 2008) and an FP6 Integrated Project named ELeGI – European Learning Grid Infrastructure (Ritrovato et al. 2005) where an innovative learning platform (IWT – Intelligent Web Teacher) was integrated with a Grid Middleware (GrASP – Grid Based Application Service Provision) in order to create the services of the Learning Grid Infrastructure (Ritrovato et al. 2009).

Currently, the Grid technologies are still under development, mainly in the context of Research Infrastructure, with an evolution towards Service Oriented Architecture before and Cloud Computing now. Indeed, in the 2009 Gartner Hype Cycle for Education there are direct references to the Grid (climbing the scope area) supporting high-intensive computational tasks, Virtual laboratories and the creation of Private Cloud or concepts like CaaS – Computing as a Service. In the 2010 and 2011 hype cycle reports, Grid Computing is moved in the plateau (2010) and off the hype (2011), while Cloud HPC/CaaS are still in at the Peak area.

#### Related terms
Cloud e-Learning; Learning in the Cloud.

#### Disciplinary issues
Even if the Learning Grid has quite unique meaning, sometime, scientist in the computer science and artificial intelligence fields could misunderstand the “learning” meaning due to the direct mind association with the “machine learning”, namely the way the machine automatically learns something.

#### Key references
[[1] Foster I. and Kesselman C. (1999) The Grid: Blueprint for a New Computing Infrastructure. Morgan Kaufmann.](http://booksite.elsevier.com/9781558609334/?ISBN=9781558609334)

[[2] Foster I., Kesselman C., Nick J., Tuecke S. (2002) The Physiology of the Grid: An Open Grid Service Architecture for Distributed System Integration.](http://toolkit.globus.org/alliance/publications/papers/ogsa.pdf)

[[3] Foster I., Kesselman C., Tuecke S. (2001) The Anatomy of the Grid: Enabling Scalable Virtual Organizations. International Journal of Supercomputer Applications 15 (3) 200-222](http://toolkit.globus.org/alliance/publications/papers/anatomy.pdf)

[4] Ritrovato P., Cerri S. A., Alison C., Gaeta M., Salerno S., Dimitrakos T. (eds.) (2005) Towards the Learning Grid: advances in Human Learning Services. Coll. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, Volume 127. IOS Press 2005.

[5] Ritrovato P., Gaeta M., Gaeta A. (2009) A grid based software architecture for delivery of adaptive and personalised learning experiences. ACM Personal and Ubiquitous Computing Journal 13 (3) 207-217.

[6] Salerno S., Gaeta M., Ritrovato P., Capuano N., Orciuoli F., Miranda S., Pierri A. (eds.) (2008) The Learning Grid Handbook – Concepts, Technologies and Applications. Coll. The Future of Learning Volume 2. IOS Press.

### Learning management systems

Draft 1

Editor: Daniel Burgos, AtoS & International University of La Rioja

Contributors: Dai Griffiths, University of Bolton; Fabrizio Giorgini, eXact Learning Solutions, Martin Wolpers, Fraunhofer FIT.

#### Definition
The term Learning Management System (LMS) refers to an integrated system that supports learners and teachers to delivering, using, managing, and tracking online training and education. This system may be used to plan, implement, and assess specific learning processes.

#### Comments on the history
Following Watson and Watson (2007 p.28) “LMS has its history in another term, integrated learning system (ILS) which offers functionality beyond instructional content such as management and tracking, personalized instruction and integration across the system […] LMS was originally used to describe the management system component of the PLATO K-12 learning system, content-free and separate from the courseware […]”.

LMS is today used to refer to integrated Web based, typically domain independent applications, which enable educational institutions and teachers to manage large numbers of learners with access to course related information, resources and services.

#### Related terms

##### Synonymous
Course Management Systems, Learning Content Management System (LCMS), Virtual Learning Environment (VLE)

##### Other related terms
E-Training System, Instructional management systems, Integrated learning System, Learning Social Networks, Personal Learning Environment.

#### Disciplinary issues
LMSs are used to support a range of activities and objectives, with the system being used in slightly different ways in each case. For example, formal and informal learning are often mixed in the different uses of an LMS. In the workplace, the development of formally defined professional competences can be facilitated by an LMS and social tools which it makes available. On the other hand an LMS can support social networks which concentrate on informal learning in non-regulated programs, but which nonetheless also have to engage with formal learning objectives. A framework for the pedagogical evaluation of the ways in which LMS systems can be used is available in Britain and Liber, 2004.

LMS's provide institutions with a content management system (CMS) combined with an integrated suite of learning services, and a means of managing access to contents and organizational items (e.g. courses) for large numbers of users. LMS design includes roles, typically:

* (i) administrators who determine the structure of the server and the services which are made available by the system;
* (ii)  teachers who determine the structure of an individual course, select services from those made available by administrators, and provide content and instructions to learners;
* (iii) learners who access the services and content of a particular instance of a course, and can input their own texts and files to designated areas of the server.

The following features are typical of an LMS: management of users and roles; course management; synchronous services (e.g. online chat); asynchronous services (e.g. forum); mentoring; assessment; personalization features

#### Key references

[[1] Britain, S. & Liber, O. (2004) A Framework for Pedagogical Evaluation of VLEs, JTAP.](http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/69/62/34/PDF/Liber-2004.pdf)

[[2] Berking, P & Gallagher, S. (2010). Choosing a Learning Management System. Advanced Distributed Learning (ADL) Co-Laboratories.](http://www.adlnet.gov/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/choosing-lms-v.2.4_201104132.pdf)

[[3] Watson W. R., Watson S. L. (2007). An argument for clarity: what are learning management systems, what are they not, and what should they become? TechTrends, 51(2), 28-34.](http://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/69/20/67/PDF/Watson-2007.pdf)

### Learning objects

Draft 1

Editor: Nicolas Balacheff, CNRS, Laboratoire d’Informatique de Grenoble

Contributor: Erik Duval, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven

#### Definition
A learning object is “any entity -digital or non-digital- that may be used for learning, education or training” (IEEE LTSC 2002).

#### Comments on the history
The first functional use of the term “learning object” is often attributed to Wayne Hodgins, who used this expression in the early 90s (Polsani 2003, Saum 2007). The attention was drawn to this concept by the need for a more effective and efficient approach to eLearning , through the possibility of reusing educational/learning resources. In 1996, several events marked the emergence of the concept (Saum 2007), among them the European funding of [ARIADNE](http://ariadne-eu.org/) [1] for the sharing and reuse of educational resources, the start of the [Advanced Distributed Learning initiative](http://adlnet.org/) [2] . the setting up of the IMS Global Learning Consortium [3], the creation of the trademark “rapid learning object” by EM-Assist Inc., and eventually the formation of the IEEE Learning Technology Standards Committee (LTSC).

#### Related terms
educational object, teaching material, learning material, learning object metadata, reusable learning object, unit of study, instructional unit, learning resource, SCORM

#### Disciplinary issues
There are several definitions of “learning object” (see esp. Saum 2007): this diversity raises questions about the robustness of the concept either from an educational perspective or from a computational perspective. From an educational perspective, the definitions range from any object which may be used for a learning purpose, to the requirement that this object has a demonstrated pedagogical value. From a computational perspective, the definition raises the issue of granularity, some requiring the learning object to be atomic, and the issue of interoperability which explains the importance of technical standards related to this concept. A debatable issue is the independence of the learning object from specific instructional or learning theories.

#### Key references
IEEE LTSC [4] (2002) Draft Standard for Learning Object Metadata. IEEE-SA Standard 1484.12.1. New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.

Polsani P. R. [5] (2003) Use and Abuse of Reusable Learning Objects. Journal of Digital 

Information 3 (4)

Saum R. R. [6] (2007) An abridged history of learning objects. In: Northrup P. (ed.) Learning Objects for Instruction: Design and Evaluation. Hershey PA: IGI Global.

### Learning scenario

Draft 1

Editor: Viviane Guéraud, Université Stendhal, Laboratoire d’Informatique de Grenoble (LIG)

Contributors: Anne Lejeune, Université Pierre Mendès France, Laboratoire d’Informatique de Grenoble (LIG) ; Jean-Philippe Pernin, Université Stendhal, Laboratoire d’Informatique de Grenoble

#### Definition
A learning scenario is an a priori description of a learning situation, independently of the underlying pedagogical approach. It describes its organization with the goal of ensuring the appropriation of a precise set of knowledge, competences or skills. It may specify roles, activities and required resources, tools and services.

#### Comments on the history
The expression "learning scenario" appeared progressively in the TEL context when learning design approaches began to focus more on the learning activities rather than on the learning resources.
From a learning design perspective, a learning scenario refers to the formal description of a "unit of learning" as defined by Koper (2003). Within the LD specification which is proposed as a standard Educational Modeling Language (EML), a learning scenario corresponds to the method ([1]). Whereas the “method” concept is an abstract term without learning connotation, many researchers in learning design commonly use the learning scenario notion instead of it.

#### Related terms
##### Synonymous
Pedagogical scenario, Educational scenario, Instructional scenario
##### Other related terms
Abstract learning scenario, Adaptive learning scenario, Assistance scenario, Collaboration script, Computable learning scenario, Contextualized learning scenario, Formal learning scenario, Generic learning scenario, Informal learning scenario,

#### Disciplinary issues
According to the designer's point of view, “learning scenario” can address either the description of the learning tasks or the assistance tasks or both of them. For example, [Paquette, 2003] distinguishes learning scenario from assistance scenario, while for [Koper, 2005] the learning activities and the staff activities can be described in the same learning scenario. Learning scenarios may be based on different pedagogical strategies (e.g. collaborative learning, inquiry learning, problem based learning, etc.) [Wichmann et al., 2010]. Considering collaborative learning, a learning scenario is usually called a collaboration script (Dillenbourg 2002).

Learning scenarios (LS) can be classified according to different criteria (Lejeune & Pernin, 2004): granularity of the targeted learning situation, constraint level associated to the learning situations, personalization level, formalization level, abstraction level.

#### Key references
[2] Koper, R. (2003). Combining re-usable learning resources and services to pedagogical purposeful units of learning. In A. Littlejohn (Ed.),Reusing Online Resources: A Sustainable Approach to eLearning (pp. 46-59). London: Kogan Page.

[3] Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional design. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL. Can we support CSCL (pp. 61-91). Heerlen: Open Universiteit Nederland.

[4] Koper. R., Tattersall C. (2005). Learning Design : A Handbook on Modelling and Delivering Networked Education and Training, Springer Verlag.

[5] Lejeune A., Pernin J-P. (2004). A taxonomy for scenario-based engineering, Cognition and Exploratory Learning in Digital Age (CELDA 2004) Proceedings, Lisboa, Portugal, 2004, p.249-256

[6] Paquette G. (2003). Instructional engineering in networked environments, John Wiley and Sons, 262 p.

[7] Rawlings A., Van Rosmalen P., Koper E.J.R., Rodríguez-Artacho M.R., Lefrere P. (2002). Survey of Educational Modelling Languages (EMLs), Publication CEN/ISSS WS/Learning Technologies.).

[8] Wichmann, A., Engler, J., & Hoppe, U. (2010). Sharing educational scenario designs in practitioner communities. In K. Gomez, L. Lyons, & J. Radinsky (Eds.), Learning in the Disciplines. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2010), Vol 2 (pp. 750-757). International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc.

### Learning space

Draft 1

Editor: Brett Bligh, Learning Sciences Research Institute, University of Nottingham

Contributors: Mike Sharples, Learning Sciences Research Institute, University of Nottingham

#### Definition
The term ”learning space” highlights the mutually supporting ways in which learning as an activity and space as an environment construct and modify each other. Space mediates our thinking and is a vehicle for our objectified thoughts; it both shapes and is shaped by practice. Learning space is the product of design processes that rely on assumptions of relationships between forms of space and practices of learning. The ‘space’ component is intended to refer to physical space, although its meaning has been extended to include virtual and conceptual space.

#### Comments on the history
The concept of learning space has developed from many fragmented antecedents. The expression entered the lexicon in its currently understood sense around 2000. A common approach was to discuss the affordances inherent in design and to see space and learning as related representationally. For example, Monahan (2002) argues, firstly, that space should be ‘flexible’ in order to meet learners’ sensory and mobility needs and, secondly, that designers should adopt built pedagogy as their design philosophy, based on the need to influence individuals’ behavior and action through design. Other approaches have emerged that place increasing emphasis on contextual factors and the multi-voiced nature of learning activity. Boys (2011, p.81) argues that learning space should be understood as a series of intersecting aspects:

* Engagement and adaptation: how people understand and are affected by their environment, and how they use space and transform it through their use;
* Spatial routine: those everyday social and spatial practices which affect, and are understood by, others within a community;
* Design: established repertoires of spatial designs and the process and outcome of attempted innovation.

Some use space almost entirely as a metaphor for how individuals manage their life-worlds (e.g. Savin-Baden 2008).

A parallel strand of work emphasizes that use and perception of learning space is intertwined with institutional visions and politics. Recently, some work has sought to shift the granularity of discussion about learning space, for example to focus on Universities as campuses. Neary et al. (2010) introduced the expression “learning landscapes”, suggesting that such spaces can embody the ’idea’ of the University as an institution and that campuses can be understood according to a profile, mapping measures of expression, efficiency and effectiveness against institutional visions.

#### Related terms
Classroom Design, Context, Learning Environments, Communities of Practice, Learning Design, Learning Landscapes.

#### Disciplinary issues
Learning space is an interdisciplinary field of enquiry by its very nature and remains fragmented across a range of perspectives. Van Note Chism (2002, pp. 7-9) catalogues several such perspectives that remain in evidence nearly a decade later, including:

* Theoretical perspectives on space and learning, emerging from disciplines such as sociology, philosophy and education (e.g. Boys 2011; Vavoula & Sharples 2009).
* Design specification literature, often a product of service practitioners. Such work may often make only slight reference to other literature or else seek to derive its guidelines from basic research positioned as an authority.
* Investigating the impact of physical arrangements on learning, encompassing a range of work that investigates the processes and outcomes of fine-grained variations in classroom design.

A disciplinary perspective on learning space work that is not covered by Van Note Chism’s categories is phenomenological investigation, which is popular within architecture. A prominent example is Juhani Pallasmaa (1995/2005), who emphasises the importance of considering the holistic sensory experiences that occur when encountering space. Work adhering to each of these perspectives often seems to progress in isolation rather than either mutually informing or competing with other vantage points, resulting in ongoing fragmentation in how learning space is conceptualized. Boys (2011), for example, discusses at length the tensions between architects’, estates planners’ and educationalists’ conceptions of learning space. Such points could be made with equal validity about technology designers, learners, teachers, support staff, and policymakers.

#### Key references
[1] Boys, J. (2010) Towards Creative Learning Spaces: Re-thinking the architecture of post-compulsory education. London: Routledge.

[2] Gallagher, W. (1993) The Power of Place: How our surroundings shape our thoughts, emotions and actions. New York, NY: Harper Perennial Library.

[3] Monahan, T. (2002) Flexible Space & Built Pedagogy: Emerging IT Embodiments. Inventio, 4(1), 1-19.

[4] Neary, M., Harrison, A., Crellin, G., Parekh, N., Saunders, G., Duggan, F., Williams, S., & Austin, A. (2010) Learning Landscapes in Higher Education: Clearing pathways, making spaces, involving academics in the leadership, governance and management of academic spaces in higher education. Lincoln: Centre for Educational Research and Development.

[5] Pallasmaa, J. (2005) The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses. London: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

[6] Savin-Baden, M. (2008). Learning Spaces: Creating opportunities for knowledge creation in academic life. Maidenhead: Open University Press.

[7] Van Note Chism, N. (2002) A Tale of Two Classrooms. New Directions for Teaching and Learning, 92, 5-12.

[8] Vavoula, G. & Sharples, M. (2009) Meeting the Challenges in Evaluating Mobile Learning: A 3-level Evaluation Framework. International Journal of Mobile and Blended Learning, 1(2), 54-75.

### Mobile learning

Draft 3

Editor: Mike Sharples, Learning Sciences Research institute, University of Nottingham, UK

Contributors: Agnes Kukulska-Hulme, The Open University UK / Gonca Telli Yamamoto, Okan University, Turkey / John Traxler, University of Wolverhampton, UK

#### Definition
Any sort of [technology enhanced] learning that happens when the learner is not at a fixed, predetermined location or learning that happens when the learner takes advantage of the learning opportunities offered by mobile technologies.

####Comments on the history
In the early 1970s Alan Kay and colleagues proposed the concept of a Dynabook as a "personal dynamic medium the size of a notebook". That group developed the desktop computer as an "interim Dynabook" and the Smalltalk language as its communications system. In 1991 Apple Classrooms of Tomorrow used a tablet computers connected by a wireless network to communicate between children on a field trip and others located in the school 15 miles away. Two projects funded in the early 2000s by the European commission - MOBIlearn and M-learning - established mobile learning in Europe, leading to the mLearn, WMUTE, and IADIS Mobile Learning international conference series and establishment of the International Association for Mobile Learning.

####Related terms
Pervasive Learning, Ubiquitous Learning, Seamless Learning, Augmented Reality Learning, One to One Learning, Handheld Learning, Mobile Ubiquitous and Immersive Technology Enhanced Learning, Blended Learning.

#### Translation issues
There are translation issues related to the phrase ‘mobile learning'. For example, in French there are several terms in use: l'apprentissage nomade, l'enseignement nomade, le nomad-learning, l'apprentissage mobile, le m-learning, and le mobile-learning. In English there are related and overlapping terms, including: handheld learning, pervasive learning, ambient learning and ubiquitous learning. Each of these terms can be used in some combination of technology orientation, learning orientation, or socio-cultural orientation (e.g. learning in a mobile world).
There are also differences in the interpretation of ‘mobile learning' that arise from cultural and national priorities and research cultures. Thus, research in Europe arising from the MOBIlearn and m-Learning projects has an emphasis on the mobility of the learner and connecting learning across contexts (Kukulska-Hulme et al., 2009). In the US, a predominant focus is on effective delivery of educational content and applications on portable devices such as smartphones and tablet computers (Roschelle & Pea, 2002). A related perspective associated with the G1:1 network (Chan et al. 2006) embraces 1 to 1 learning in classrooms with each child equipped with a personal wireless device (see also, Zurita & Nussbaum, 2004). Another perspective embraces ‘mobile technology for development', where mobile services including SMS and mobile web access can enable learning for professional development, conversation and collaboration where such communication was not previously available (Traxler, J. & Leach, J, 2007).

#### Disciplinary issues
The definition above, adapted from [O’Malley et al. (2003)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MLearning), is generally accepted . It indicates the dual nature of learning assisted by mobile devices, which could be in a fixed location such as a classroom or workplace, or across contexts supported by a variety of fixed and mobile technology. For the former, the focus is on enabling learning with handheld technology. For the latter, the emphasis is on the mobility of the learner in a technology-rich environment.

The field has been characterized by two types of activity: first, adopting mobile technology for learning across physical, social or economic distance and separation; and second, using handheld devices to enhance, extend or disrupt prevalent conceptions of learning. How these activities are expressed may be determined by physical and environmental factors and by differing notions of education in formal and informal contexts.

Mobile technologies, and mobility of learning, are ‘boundary objects’ with interpretations that differ amongst disciplinary communities. Thus, the key concept of ‘context’ for mobile learning can be seen from a technology perspective as an integration of data sources or from a activity theory perspective as being generated through by the activities of objective-oriented people mediated by technology Sharples et al. (2007) is an attempt to reconcile the technical and socio-cultural perspectives of mobile learning.

#### Key references
[1] Kukulska-Hulme, A., Sharples, M., Milrad, M., Arnedillo-Sánchez, I. & Vavoula, G. (2009) Innovation in Mobile Learning: a European Perspective. International Journal of Mobile and Blended Learning, 1,1, 13-35.

[2] Chan, T-W., Roschelle, J., Hsi, S., Kinshuk, Sharples, M. and 16 others (2006) One-to-one Technology Enhanced Learning: An Opportunity for Global Research Collaboration. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 1,1 pp. 3-29.

[3] O'Malley, C., Vavoula, G., Glew, JpP., Taylor, J., Sharples, M. & Lefrere, P. (2005). Guidelines for Learning/Teaching/Tutoring in a Mobile Environment. MOBIlearn project report, D4.1.

[4] Roschelle, J., Pea, R. (2002). A walk on the WILD side: How wireless handhelds may change computer-supported collaborative learning. International Journal of Cognition and Technology, 1(1), 145-168.

[5] Sharples, M., Taylor, J., & Vavoula, G. (2007) A Theory of Learning for the Mobile Age. In R. Andrews and C. Haythornthwaite (eds.)The Sage Handbook of Elearning Research. London: Sage, pp. 221-47.

[6] Traxler J. & Leach J. (2006) Innovative and sustainable mobile learning in Africa. WMUTE 2006: Proceedings of the IEEE 4th International Workshop on Wireless, Mobile and Ubiquitous Technologies in Education, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, IEEE Computer Society.

### Multimedia learning

draft 1

Editor: Mireille Bétrancourt, TECFA, Faculty of Psychology and Education, university of Geneva, Switzerland

#### Definition
Multimedia Learning is a form of learning supported by different sources of information (e.g. text and graphics) being handled jointly in order to understand and memorize a given content (facts, concept, procedure…).

#### Comments on the history
Multimedia learning emerged from the field of text comprehension. In the 1970s, it was observed that including pictures in the text dramatically increased comprehension and memorization of text information (see the review from Levie & Lentz, 1982). A large body of research was carried out to identify the underlying cognitive processes explaining the positive effect of pictures in learning from text (Mandl & Levin, 1989; Johnson-Laird, 1983; Schnotz, 2001). Simultaneously, another current was focusing on the instructional issues: what pictures help which learners for what learning outcomes? This double theoretical and instructional objective is still very present in the current research and large body of recommendations for the design of effective multimedia instruction is now available (e.g., Mayer, 2005).

#### Related terms
Multiple representation, external representation, multimedia instruction

#### Translation issues
French: Apprendre à partir d’informations multimédia ; Compréhension de documents multimédia.

German: Wissenserwerb mit Multimedia.

#### Disciplinary issues
By multimedia (Mayer 2001, p. 2) is meant the presentation of material using both words (e.g. printing or spoken text) and pictures (e.g. static graphics, including graphs photos, maps, or dynamic graphics, including animation or video); hence the definition of multimedia learning as learning with multiple representations. However, multimedia learning is often mistaken as multimodal learning, in the sense of learning through different sensory channels (auditory, visual, kinesthetic). For example, learning from auditory and written text would not be considered as multimedia learning in its original sense. However, multimedia learning also considers the modality issues, especially in the case where different media are conveyed through different sensory modalities. Interactivity is also a major issue in Multimedia learning, that then get close to the concept of simulation.

#### Key references
[1] Johnson-Laird P. N. (1983) Mental Models: Toward a Cognitive Science of Language, Inference and Consciousness. Harvard University Press.

[2] Levie W. H., Lentz R. (1982) Effects of text illustrations: A review of research. Educational Communication and Technology, 30(4), 195-233.

[3] Mandl, H., Levin J.R. (1989) Knowledge acquisition from text and pictures, North-Holland, 
Amsterdam (1989).

[4] Mayer R. E. (2001) Multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.

[5] Mayer R. E. (Ed). (2005) Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.

[6] Schnotz W. (2001) Sign systems, technologies, and the acquisition of knowledge. In J.F. Rouet, J.J. Levonen, & A. Biardeau, A. (Eds.), Multimedia learning: Cognitive and instructional issues (pp. 9-29). Amsterdam: Elsevier.

### Narrative learning environments

Draft 1

Editor: Giuliana Dettori, Institute for Educational Technology, CNR, Genoa, Italy

#### Definition
A Narrative Learning Environment (NLE) is a learning environment involving its user(s) in ICT-mediated activities where narratives (i.e., stories or narrations) related to the proposed cognitive task play a central role in facilitating learning.

In this definition, the emphasis on activity excludes story-based tutorials from NLEs, since this type of tutorials does not involve learners in any activity apart from reading. Analogously, the emphasis on the connection of narrative and cognitive task leads to exclude from NLEs all learning environments which only use stories as appealing backgrounds for unrelated problem solving activity, with the aim to raise extrinsic motivation but without exploiting the learning potential of narrative.

An Interactive NLE is an AI-based NLE which allows the joint construction of stories by the user and the system.

#### Comments on the history
The expression Narrative Learning Environment was created in the 90s within the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI), to name learning environments where stories, interactively created by user and software, had a central role in facilitating learning. Afterwards, the widespread interest raised by the educational potential of narrative led this expression to be used to name a variety of learning environments based on different kinds of technology, which share with the original NLEs a similar use of narrative-based activities to support learning (Dettori & Paiva, 2009, p. 58).

AI-based NLEs are technological constructions, with all the necessary components packaged in them (assignment of task-related narrative activities, pedagogical approach, selection of suitable technological tools to represent stories, support dialogues and play artificial characters). On the other hand, NLEs based on Educational Design, Multimedia or web 2.0 technology do not consist of single programs but are conceptual constructions in which widely-available technological tools (such as multimedia editors and communication technologies) facilitate the execution of learning-related narrative tasks. Tasks need to be defined by teachers or educational designers. Together with a pedagogical approach, they are apt to foster the achievement of the expected learning. These NLEs allow the level of interactivity afforded by the technological tools employed, such as hypermedia navigation and communication with networked users, but can not support joint story construction by user and software; for this reason, they are not considered interactive, even though the learner actually interacts with a story and with other learners.

#### Related terms
##### Synonymous
Narrative-centred learning environments, Story-based learning environments

#### Other related terms
Interactive narrative learning environment, narrative learning.

#### Disciplinary issues
NLEs may be mediating tools for the development of narrative competence, as well as mediators for the development of other kinds of competence, both subject-related (linguistic expression in foreign or mother language, history, science, etc.), or soft skills (decision making, relational behaviour in critical conditions, etc.). In either case, cognitively relevant skills are also put into play, such as creativity, understanding, communication, awareness of logical constraints, negotiation with peers, memory. This multiple influence on learning is not surprising since narrative is a cultural artefact mediating learners' action, and it is typical of mediated action to have several simultaneous goals (Wertsch, 1998, p. 25).

The term "narrative" is often improperly used to mean non-technical or non-pictorial discourse, instead of a "sequence of events, mental states, happenings" interrelated with each other (Bruner, 1990, p.43). A wide-angle, generic, use of this term voids of meaning the use of narrative in education, missing to exploit its learning potential, which derives from the fact that story elements constitute, all together, a whole from which each of them takes meaning (Bruner, 2003; Ricoeur, 2005). This allows people interacting with a narrative to infer more than what is explicitly reported, and hence to engage in an instinctive meaning-construction process. Narrative communicates ideas in a holistic way, which grants it the potential to convey rich and complex messages in simple form. For this reason, stories are considered the prime means by which human beings give meaning to their experience of temporality, cause-effect and personal actions (Polkinghorne, 1988).

#### Key references
[1] Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

[2] Bruner, J. (2003). Making Stories. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

[3] Dettori, G., & Paiva, A. (2009). Narrative Learning in technology-enhanced environments. In S. Ludvigsen, N. Balacheff, T. de Jong, A. Lazonder and S. Barnes (Eds.), Technology-enhanced learning: Principles and products (pp. 55-69). Berlin: Springer.

[4] Polkinghorne, D. (1988). Narrative Knowing and the Human Sciences. New York, NY: State University of New York Press.

[5] Ricoeur, P. (2005). Hermeneutics and the Human Sciences. Edited and translated by J. B. Thompson, 17th edition. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

[6] Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 216p.

### Networked learning

Draft 4

Editor: Chris Jones, The Institute for Educational Technology, The Open University (UK).

Contributors: Vivien Hodgson, Lancaster University (UK), David McConnell, UK.

#### Definition
Networked learning is “learning in which information and communication technology […] is used to promote connections: between one learner and other learners, between learners and tutors; between a learning community and its learning resources” (Goodyear et al., 2004, p.1).
The definition takes a relational stance towards learning, which is defined as taking place both in relation to others and in relation to learning resources. The central term in the definition of networked learning is connections. These connections include interactions between people and materials and resources, but interactions with materials alone are not sufficient. Networked learning requires some element of human-human interaction mediated through digital technologies.

#### Comments on the history
The definition of networked learning comes from the Centre for Studies in Advanced Learning Technology (CSALT) team at Lancaster University in the United Kingdom (Steeples and Jones 2002 p.2). This definition arose from a series of UK and EU projects during the late 1990s and it has also been associated with the Networked Learning Conference series since 1998 (Dirckinck-Holmfeld et al., 2011). The definition has proved remarkably robust since it was first published despite the rapid technological changes and the arrival and demise of a number of competing terms and definitions (e.g Computer Assisted Learning, CAL; e-learning; online learning; and Computer Supported Collaborative (Co-operative) Learning, CSCL; see Steeples and Jones (2002) p.6 and Dirckinck-Holmfeld et al. (2009) p.259).

Related terms such as “learning networks” have been used in a North American context (Harasim et al., 1995) with a more limited range restricted to text based asynchronous media. This kind of use is associated with the Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks. The term learning networks continues to be used and it has included research using social network analysis.

#### Related terms
CSCL: Computer Supported Collaborative (Co-operative) Learning; Learning network, Asynchroneous learning networks

#### Translation issues
French: apprentissage en réseau
German: Vernetztes Lernen
Chinese: Either 1. Pinyin wǎngluò, sim 网络, (network) or 2. Pinyin shùzìhuà, sim 数字化 , (digitallised) combined with Pinyin xuéxí, sim 学习, (learning)

Note: the usage of networked learning is different in mainland China to the uses described here. Networked learning in the Chinese context often takes the form of resource-based learning, where material (often in the form of a text book) is placed online and students are expected to learn it on their own.

#### Disciplinary issues
The term "networked learning" has a close relationship to CSCL (McConnell 2000) but the term networked learning implies a greater concentration on remote rather than face-to-face collaborations. Networked learning literature also tends to emphasise collaborations involving medium to large numbers rather than dyads or very small groups (Dirckinck-Holmfeld et al., 2009). However networked learning is not restricted to collaborative learning nor is it restricted to the strong links that terms like cooperation, collaboration and community imply (Dirckinck-Holmfeld et al., 2009 pp20-21).

The use of the term networked without qualification can lead to confusion with broader notions of Social Networks that do not have any necessary connection to information and communication technology. Networked learning is generally restricted to learning that is mediated by digital networks. Networked learning can also cause confusion because the use of network does not imply a strong link to the use of the term network in computer science.

#### Key references
[1] Dirckinck-Holmfeld, L., Jones, C., and Lindström, B. (Eds) (2009). Analysing Networked Learning Practices in Higher Education and Continuing Professional Development. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers, BV.

[2] Dirckinck-Holmfeld, L., Hodgson, V. and McConnell, D. (Eds) (2011). Exploring the Theory, Pedagogy and Practice of Networked Learning. NY : Springer

[3] Goodyear, P., Banks, S, Hodgson, V. and McConnell D. (Eds) (2004). Advances in Research on Networked Learning, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers

[4] Harasim, L., Hiltz, S.R., Teles, L., and Turoff, M. (1995). Learning Networks: A field guide to teaching and learning online. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[5] McConnell, D. (2000). Implementing Computer Supported Cooperative Learning. 2nd Edition. London: Kogan Page.

[6] Steeples, C., & Jones, C. (Eds.) (2002). Networked learning: perspectives and issues. London: Springer.

### Overlay

Draft 1

Editor: Nicolas Balacheff, LIG, Grenoble, France

#### Definition
The term overlay is extensively used in learner modeling research, especially for tutoring systems where Wenger acknowledges it as a "standard paradigm" (p.137). It has been coined by Carr and Goldstein in 1977 and defined in the following way:

> "The kernel idea is to design a modular Expert program for the task, and to explain differences between the behavior of the Expert and the subject in terms of the lack, on the player's part, of some of the Expert skills. Thus, a model of the player is a set of hypotheses, each of which records the system's confidence that the player possesses a given skill. Such models are called overlays to reflect the fact that the model of the individual is basically a perturbation on the Expert's structure." (p.4)

While "overlay" would mean that one model is in some way covering the other, the definition from Carr and Goldstein restricts this relation in a way which causes certain criticism of the choice of this term:

> "An "overlay model" (Carr and Goldstein, 1977) is one in which the only possible diagnosed discrepancies are missing pieces of knowledge: RS*k ⊃ RSRL*k. The use of the term "overlay" is not ideal because of its ambiguity: "partial model" would definitely be better, but "overlay" has already a long history in ITS." (Dillenbourg and Self 1992)

#### Related terms
Learner modeling, Intelligent Tutoring Systems.

#### Translation issues
French: expertise partielle. The term is often directly imported (overlay)

#### Disciplinary issues
This term has been coined as a response to the needs of a TEL research project.

#### Key references
[1] Carr B., Goldstein I. P. (1977) Overlay: a theory of modelling for computer aided instruction. AI Memo 406. Cambridge USA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology

[2] Dillenbourg P., Self J. (1992) A framework for learner modelling. Interactive Learning Environments, 2 (2) 111-137

[3] Wenger E. (1987) Artificial Intelligence and Tutoring Systems. Los Altos: Morgan Kaufmann Pub.

### Personal learning environment

Draft 3

Editor: Philippe Dessus, Laboratoire des Sciences de l’Education, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France

#### Definition
A Personalized Learning Environment (PLE) is the socio-psychological context students as individuals perceive in the classroom (Fraser, 2002).

A Personal Learning Environment is a digital space of which components have been selected and arranged by the learner to allow the access, organization, aggregation, building and sharing of learning material, in order to match his or her level of knowledge, competencies, needs, or preferences.

#### Comments on the history
The remainder of this entry focuses on the second meaning of PLEs (i.e. computer-based). The idea of personal learning environments is as old as that of personalization of computer-assisted learning environments, although the expression has not been used as such from the beginning. PLE research developed in the end of 1990's when looking for an alternative to less flexible Content Management Systems (CMS) and, later on as multi-purpose web 2.0 tools, both learner-centered and learner-driven (Johnson et al., 2006; Wilson et al., 2007).

Two main periods of the research can be identified (Park & Lee, 2004). The personalization at a macro-level (e.g. using pre-task measures and a priori information about instructional objectives and general learners traits). More recently, at a micro-level (e.g. using on-task measures of some learners characteristics).

The innovation brought by the PLE approach is the fusion of many features of TEL (Technology-Enhanced Learning), often available separately elsewhere (Hall, 2009):

* Fusion of content and people, since learners are both socially– and content–aware, allowing self-determined and co-authored content (e.g. wiki-based);
* Fusion of the applications made available by the PLE (mash-up);
* Fusion of the activities made possible within the system (e.g. search, review, read, write);
* Fusion of physical boundaries, software and physical environment, since other external resources can be part of the PLE;
* Fusion of temporal and institutional boundaries, with tools and activities proposed by institutions or chosen by learners (i.e. formal/informal learning).

#### Related terms
Personal Learning Network, Personalized Learning Environment, Student-Centered Learning Environment, Virtual Learning Environment, Mash-up, Content Management System, Distributed Learning Environment, Open Networked Learning Environment, Personalized Learning System, Complex Open-Ended Environment.

#### Translation issues
Français : Environnement Personnel d'Apprentissage (EPA), Environnement d'Apprentissage Personnel (EAP)

#### Disciplinary issues
Several disciplines are concerned with PLE research, emphasizing three combinations of terms from the acronym (Fiedler & Väljataga, 2011). First, computer scientists aiming at designing systems that can be used in context. Second, educational scientists aiming at measuring what is at stake when learners and teachers use PLEs and how they manage them. Third, instructional designers working on the way to design and personalize such systems. The following issues are still open and may lead to further research on PLEs.

* Theoretical Issue : A substantial amount of research about PLE discuss whether they are a concept or a technology (e.g. Fiedler & Väljataga, 2011); more systematic and deeper research may investigate the following questions: Who/which personalizes and initiates the personalization (stakeholder view)? What to personalize (didactical and pedagogical view)? How and when to personalize, from which traces (feedback view)?
* Design Issue : Since any PLE has to be built by learners themselves, can teachers devise efficient PLEs? Upon which process? Surprisingly few researches deal with the process of designing PLEs (see Berthold et al., 2012, however).
* Cognitive Issue : How (and why) PLEs would be particularly able to support core features of the instructional process? Dessus et al. (2008) argued that the core abilities of the participants of an instructional situation are: – communicate/get information (search, recommend); – detect/monitor other's intentions, or detect the changes within the environment (understand gaps of knowledge, opinion, emotion, etc.); – get/provide feedback and discuss it (detect and trigger contradiction). These abilities may be used as a framework to describe and classify PLEs.
* Assessment Issue : What kind of experiments would be setup in order to firmly establish the effects of PLEs on learning and teaching processes? For instance, their impacts (among other parameters often discussed) on motivation, self-regulation and social awareness.
* Overpersonalization Issue : Pariser (2011) argued that search engines like Google overpersonalize their results, yielding “ [...] less room for the chance encounters that bring insight and learning”, since the reader's own knowledge and opinions are amplified. This risk may also be encountered in PLEs.

#### Key References

[1] Berthold, M., Lachmann, P., Nussbaumer, A., Pachtchenko, S., Kiefel, A., & Albert, D. (2012). Psycho-pedagogical mash-up design for personalising the learning environment. In L. Ardissono & T. Kuflik (Eds.), Proc. Conf. UMAP 2011 (pp. 161–175). Heidelberg: Springer. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-28509-7_16

[2] Dessus, P., Mandin, S., & Zampa, V. (2008). What is teaching? Cognitive-based tutoring principles for the design of a learning environment. In S. Tazi & K. Zreik (Eds.), Common innovation in e-learning, Machine learning and humanoid (ICHSL'6) (pp. 49–55). Paris: IEEE/Europia [retrieved on 1/7/2013]

[3] Fiedler, S. H. D., & Väljataga, T. (2011). Personal learning environments: concept or technology? International Journal of Virtual and Personal Learning Environments, 2(4), 1–11. DOI:10.4018/jvple.2011100101

[4] Fraser, B. J. (2002). Learning environments research: Yesterday, today and tomorrow. In S. C. Goh & M. S. Khine (Eds.), Studies in educational learning environments: An international perspective (pp. 1–25). Londres: World Scientific.

[5] Hall, R. (2009). Towards a fusion of formal and informal learning environments: The impact of the read/write web. Electronic Journal of e-Learning, 7(1), 29–40.

[6]Jonhson, M., Liber, O., Wilson, S., Milligan, C., Beauvoir, P., & Sharples, P. (2006). The Personal Learning Environment: A report on the JISC CETIS PLE Project. Bolton: University of Bolton. [retrieved on 7/1/2013]

[7] Pariser, E. (2011). The filter bubble: What the internet is hiding from you. New York: Penguin.

[8] Park, O.-C., & Lee, J. (2004). Adaptive instructional systems. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research on educational communications and technology (2nd ed., pp. 651–684). Mahwah: Erlbaum [retrieved on 1/7/2013]

[9] Wilson, S., Liber, O., Johnson, M., Beauvoir, P., Sharples, P., & Milligan, C. (2007). Personal Learning Environments: Challenging the dominant design of educational systems. Journal of e-Learning and Knowledge Society, 3(2), 27–38 [retrieved on 11/4/2013]

### Seamless learning environments

Draft 1

Editors: Chee-Kit Looi and Lung-Hsiang Wong, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

#### Definition
In the context of TEL research the term "seamless learning", borrowed from higher education (Kuh 1996), has been promoted by the G1:1 international group:
> "We see ubiquitous access to mobile, connected, personal, handhelds creating the potential for a new phase in the evolution of technology-enhanced learning, marked by a continuity of the learning experience across different environments. We term this ‘seamless learning'." (Chan et al. 2006 p.6)

Hence:
> "Seamless learning environment bridges private and public learning spaces where learning happens as both individual and collective efforts and across different contexts (such as in-school versus after-school, formal versus informal)." (Looi et al. 2010 p.156)

The adoption of this term in the expression "seamless learning environments", or in the synonymous expression "seamless learning spaces", acknowledges an evolution of the technology and of the educational culture at the end of the XX° century:
> "... (The evolution) is characterized by ‘seamless learning spaces' and marked by continuity of the learning experience across different scenarios or contexts, and emerging from the availability of one device or more per student. By enabling learners to learn whenever they are curious and seamlessly switch between different contexts, such as between formal and informal contexts and between individual and social learning, and by extending the social spaces in which learners interact with each other, these developments, supported by theories of social learning, situated learning, and knowledge building, will influence the nature, the process and the outcomes of learning." (Chan et al. 2006 p.23)

Based on a comprehensive review of the literature, Wong (2010) identifies 10 dimensions of seamless learning:

(1) Encompassing formal and informal learning; 

(2) Encompassing personalized and social learning; 

(3) Across time; 

(4) Across locations; 

(5) Ubiquitous knowledge access (integrating context-aware learning, augmented reality learning, and ubiquitous Internet access); 

(6) Encompassing physical and digital worlds; 

(7) Combined use of multiple device types (including "stable" technologies such as desktop computers, interactive whiteboards with mobile devices); 

(8) Seamless switching between multiple learning tasks (such as data collection, analysis, presentation and communication). 

(9) Knowledge synthesis (integrating prior and new knowledge, abstract and concrete knowledge, and multi-disciplinary learning); (10) Encompassing multiple pedagogical or learning activity models.

#### Disciplinary issues
The term "seamless learning" was initially used in the research community of higher education studies without necessarily including technology as an essential component. Kuh (1996) elaborates the notion of linking students' in-class and out-of-class experiences to create seamless learning and academic success by extending it to involve off-campus experiences:

> "The word seamless suggests that what was once believed to be separate, distinct parts (e.g., in-class and out-of-class, academic and non-academic; curricular and co-curricular, or on-campus and off-campus experiences) are now of one piece, bound together so as to appear whole or continuous. In seamless learning environments, students are encouraged to take advantage of learning resources that exist both inside and outside of the classroom... students are asked to use their life experiences to make meaning of material introduced in classes..." (Kuh 1996 p.136)

Focusing on integrating formal and informal learning, Kuh's (1996) exposition stimulated further relevant studies on this learning model, such as adding the dimension of learning community and the intertwining of individual and collaborative learning into the notion.

#### Key references
[1] Kuh, G. D. (1996). Guiding principles for creating seamless learning environments for undergraduates. College Student Development, 37(2), 135-148.

[2] Chan, T-W., Roschelle, J., Hsi, S., Kinshuk, Sharples, M., Brown, T., Patton, C., Cherniavsky, J. Pea, R., Norris, C., Soloway, S., Balacheff, N., Scardamalia, M., Dillenbourg, P., Looi, C.K., Milrad, M. & Hoppe, U. (2006). One-to-One technology-enhanced learning: An opportunity for global research collaboration. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 1(1), 3-29.

[3] Looi, C. K., Seow, P., Zhang, B., So, H. J., Chen, W-L., & Wong, L. H. (2010). Leveraging mobile technology for sustainable seamless learning: a research agenda. British Journal of Educational Technology. 41(2), 154-169.

[4] Wong, L.-H., & Looi, C.-K. (2011). What seams do we remove in mobile assisted seamless learning? A critical review of the literature]. Computers & Education, 57(4), 2364-2381, doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2011.06.007.

#### Related terms

Seamless learning, Seamless learning space, Mobile Learning, Ubiquitous Learning, Formal Learning, Informal Learning, Lifelong Learning

### Self-regulated learning
Draft 1

Editor: Karl Steffens, University of Cologne, Germany

#### Definition
"Students can be described as self-regulated to the degree that they are metacognitively, motivationally, and behaviorally active participants in their own learning process" (Zimmerman, 1998a, p.4).

#### Comments on the history
The term self-regulated learning has a long tradition and it is difficult to say when it was first used and by whom. It is often equated with learning to learn and as such has been named as one of the 21st century key competences (e.g. European Council, 2006). Self-regulated learning has also become a key concept in technology enhanced learning (TEL). The development of powerful computer programs and internet applications has made it possible to construct TEL environments which have the potential to support the acquisition, maintenance and improvement of self-regulated leaning skills (Carneiro et al., 2011).

#### Related terms
Metacognition, self-directed learning, personalized learning, self-regulated personalized learning

#### Translation issues
German: selbstgesteuertes Lernen

Français : apprentissage auto-régulé

Spanish: la autoregulación de aprendizaje

#### Disciplinary issues
The term self-regulated learning is mainly used in education and educational psychology. In discussing the concept of self-regulated learning, it is important to distinguish between broad and narrow conceptions. In a broad sense, learning is self-regulated if the learner is free to decide what, when, where and how to learn (Weinert, 1982). Many authors, however, use the term in the narrow sense, i.e. they assume that students in traditional learning settings only have a choice as to how to learn. Zimmerman (1998b, 2000) also suggested a social cognitive model of self-regulated learning according to which self-regulation is achieved in cycles consisting of (1) forethought, (2) performance or volitional control and (3) self-reflection.

#### Key references
[1] Carneiro, R., Lefrere, P. Steffens, K. & Underwood, J. (Eds.) (2011). Self-regulated learning in technology enhanced learning environments: A European perspective. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.

[2] European Council(2006). Recommendation of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 on key competences for lifelong learning

[3] Weinert, F.E. (1982) Selbstgesteuertes Lernen als Voraussetzung, Methode und Ziel des Unterrichts [Self-regulated learning as prerequisite, method and objective of instruction]. Unterrichtswissenschaft, 10 (2), 99-110.

[4] Zimmerman, B.J. (1989a). Models of self-regulated learning and academic achievement. Pp. 1-25 in B.J. Zimmerman & D.H. Schunk (Eds.). Self-regulated Learning and Academic Achievement. Theory, Research and Practice. New York: Springer.

[5] Zimmerman, B.J. (2000). Attaining self-regulation: a social cognitive perspective. Pp. 13-39 in M. Boekaerts, P. Pintrich, & M. Zeidner (Eds.). Handbook of self-regulation. New York: Academic Press.

### Simulation-based learning environment

draft 1

Editor: Wim Westera, Centre for Learning Sciences and Technologies, Open University of the Netherlands, NL

Contributor: Johann Riedel, Nottingham University Business School, University of Nottingham, UK

#### Definition
A simulation-based learning environment is a setting for learning that includes a controlled, shielded and often simplified copy of a real world process or system to be studied.

#### Comments on the history
Early usage of simulation-based learning dates back to the early 1900s, when mechanical flight simulators were used to reproduce on the ground the behaviour of an aircraft in flight so that students could practice in a safe environment (Rolfe & Staples, 1986).

In the 1950s modern business simulations (also called business simulation games, or management games) were introduced to let students deal with practical challenges of business. First versions were hand-scored simulations but since the emergence of mainframe computers and later PCs, computer-based business simulations became the standard (Wolfe, 1993).

From 2000, inspired by both the successes of the video games industry and the emergence of the internet, a renewed interest arose in the use of simulations for learning, often referred to with the term “serious games” originally coined by Abt (Abt, 1970).

Simulation-based learning now covers a wide range of application areas, including science and math, language, history and culture, economics, health and fitness, construction, production and supply chain management, soft skills, ethics and many more.

#### Related terms
Game, serious game, microworld, virtual reality, virtual world, exercise, wet practical, dry practical role-play, game-based learning, augmented reality, learning game

#### Disciplinary issues
Simulation is a methodology for understanding the interrelationships among components of a process or a system; it uses a model that depicts or mirrors some aspects of reality in form, not necessarily in content (Aldrich, 2004). Strictly a simulation only covers the process or system it replicates. A simulation-based learning environment extends it to an interactive simulation, which includes the learner in the loop and possibly provides structured opportunities for learning, either by adding instructions, assignments, learning scenarios, feedback, assessments or other learning support functions. Simulation-based learning environments enable learners to engage in realistic scenarios with requisite complexity that allow experimentation and safe practices. They allow learners to change parameters of the simulation or to experiment with its functional layout, without any other consequence than a state change in the simulation. They thus provides a risk-free environment for learning.

#### Key references
Abt, C. [1] (1970). Serious games. Viking Press, New York.

Aldrich, C. [2] (2004) Simulations and the future of learning. Pfeiffer, San Francisco, CA.

Rolfe, J.M. & Staples , K.J. [3] (1988), Flight Simulation, Cambridge University Press, London.

Wolfe, J. [4] (1993). A history of business teaching games in English-speaking and post-socialist countries: the origination and diffusion of a management education and development technology. 

Simulation & Gaming, 24(4), 446-463.

## Wikipedia: Educational Technology
Look at: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Educational_technology](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Educational_technology)

# 4.2.1 How should we plan for integrting ICT

## Who should be involved in choosing technology or digital content for a school?
*record your answers*

## What criteria do you think should be the most important to be considered when choosing new technologies or new content?
*record your answers*

## What are your plans for further extending the digital environment of your school, or your schools? What should a school be aiming at?
*record your answers*