---
layout: post
title: "W5.5: Reflecting on the week"
description: "technology opprotunities, assignement, strategies to support children who can't afford ICT"
modified: 2014-06-26
tags: [ICT, issues, SEN, assignment]
image:
  feature: evelyn flint rose.jpg
  credit: Evelyn Flint/Texture Time
  creditlink: www.flickr.com/photos/texturetime/
comments: true
share: true
---

Week 5: HOW TO OVERCOME THE CHALLENGES OF ICT IN PRIMARY EDUCATION

5.5 REFLECTION ON THE WEEK

Instructor: Florian Meyer and Natalia Tokareva

{:.no_toc}

* Will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents" header
{:toc}


# 5.5.1 Sharing suggestions

> The assignment this week is to reflect on the ideas and suggestions for overcoming the key challenges, and to prepare your own response to one of the challenges of your choice.

Identify a suggestion for addressing one of the key challenges in integrating ICT listed below

* Money
* Support
* Technology and infrastructure
* Teachers Knowledge and confidence
* Time
* School Management
* Family Context

Make use of the ideas in Activity 5.3.2, and the examples and ideas you found in the readings, the video examples and your own experience.

Summarise your suggestion, using the following headings in approximately 400 words:
Title – a name for your suggestion 
Context – the local context in which you would be implementing this (~ 20 words)
The challenge – which of the challenges are you setting out to address?
Your suggestion – including the ICT tool or resource being used, and any activities you set up (~150 words, for up to 30 marks)
For each of the other challenges, what further action would be needed to deal with it? (~250 words altogether, or a sentence or two on each of the other 6, for up to 10 marks each)
Before submitting, check to make sure your summary matches the assessment criteria presented below.
We are not expecting brilliant solutions - these are difficult issues for everyone. The main point is to show your awareness of what can be done, and of the ways of addressing all the different aspects of integrating ICT.

**TIME**
**Context**: in my country many teachers don't have enought time (and support) for innovation and development to use ICT for teaching and learning, especially young teachers who don't have many experiences (workoverload)

**The challenge**: teachers to have more time to innovate and to implement ICT in their classrooms

**Suggestion:** 
The most affordable solution is to give teachers **more opportunites to work with each other**, to share their ideas and their lessons. Teachers also cannot prepare ALL their lessons on their own anymore, so it is important to learn from each other, share ideas and learning/teaching material. They also need **constant support from school leadership and technicians**.I think that innovative teachers should have **less other work to do**, as to prepare school events and so on, or less teaching hours. The **school leadership** has very important role here to encourage and support innovative teachers.

I like the idea of the **club of modern teachers** (local and national), so teachers can learn form each other. There should also be a **website** where teachers can share their resources, comment on them, and easily adapt them (as it is possilbe with the Learning designer) and also learn about new ideas, new research findongs on ICT in education, read about good practices. It should be made on the national level so everyone can learn from each other. 

I think that also the government should better support innovative teachers:

* smaller classes (less pupils)
* better access to the ICT (optimal 1:1)
* less teaching hours and other work or better payment for those who do innovate (that means they overwork)
* less teaching hours for the first year of teaching (new teachers)
* support the development of the new teaching materials that can be used with ICT (e-textbooks, apps ...)

**Other challenges:**

* **money:** even if it is hard, the government should find money and a way to give ICT tools to schools, because it is very important for education. The content can be also developed by students on the universities as in the Hungary. The ICT-companies could give discounts if there are many tools, apps ... ordered.
* **support:** technician support available all the time, online support, school leadership support
* **technology and infrastructure:** teachers should all together decide which tool they are going to use since is the most suitable for their needs (quality, support ...), ICT should always be used in the service of pedagogy.
* **teachers knowledge and confidence:** club of modern teachers, website (as mentioned above), support
* **school management:** should be supportive, online work, ICT should have an important role in school culture
* **family context:** parents should be included and supported (their own ICT-development)


# 7 strategies to support students who can't afford technology

Not part of the course, an interesting article with ideas I've found.

06/30/2014, TeachThought Staff

[http://www.teachthought.com/technology/5-strategies-support-students-cant-afford-technology/](http://www.teachthought.com/technology/5-strategies-support-students-cant-afford-technology/)

For all of its potential, education technology suffers from a flaw that public education has struggled with since its inception–equity. However you want to phrase it or refract it as an issue, the bottom line is that some people have more than others, and that creates gaps. Lots of them.

So we thought an over-generalizing and necessarily reductionist post that takes a swing at a timeless and painful theme that has more to do with social justice than teaching may be a good way to get this week started.

7 Strategies To Support Students Who Can’t Afford Technology

## 1. Write a grant proposal to purchase inexpensive technology

Grants take a special kind of personality to obtain. Some people just have a knack for finding, picking, applying, and qualifying for them–so much paperwork, bureaucracy, minutiae, and tedium. But if the technology you’re seeking is beyond the reach of your average book drive or bake sale, this might be the only way.

And there’s power here, too. Play your cards right, and you could end up with a completely overhauled classroom.

## 2. Ask local businesses to sponsor a classroom or club

Someone with enough money to help, but that is locally-owned would be ideal. Smaller banks can be useful here.

## 3. Solicit donated used electronic equipment through drives or related campaigns

Ask parents or the community to donate old technology. Ask Best Buy or some giant chain to support what you’re trying to do. Email us and we’ll share it via twitter to see if anyone out there can help. There are ways!

## 4. Purchase used, inexpensive gadgets and offer them as prizes for academic success 

Even if craiglist or eBay aren’t your thing, you can get brand new Android smartphones for $50, and used for even less. No that money doesn’t have to come out of your pocket, but, well–that’s what district budgets and grants are for.

You could have a classroom set of used smartphones for less than $1000 if you’re resourceful enough.

## 5. Have students brainstorm ideas to help solve this issue themselves

Speaking of resourceful, students may or may not have “good ideas” to help here, but empowering them to try to address the issue on their own can be powerful, especially for older students. Being resourceful is an important “soft skill,” and requires practice, no?

## 6. Crowdsource it

Donorschoose, kickstarter, Indiegogo, and other platforms can help you socialize the needs of your classroom.

## 7. Design learning experiences where they don’t feel left out without it

If all else fails, design learning experiences where the students that have access can use it, and the ones without it don’t feel like outcasts.

This isn’t easy but it can be done through grouping strategies, after school use of school technology, or ensuring that the non-technology roles that the tech-less students have are even more compelling than everyone else’s.




